Chronographia of 528 Years
beginning in the First Year of Diocletian, down to the second Year of Michael and the 
Latter's Son Theophylaktos, i.e. from the Year 5777 of the World until the Year 6305 
according to the Alexandrians or 6321 according to the Romans
by
Theophanes, Sinful Monk and Abbot of Agros, the Confessor

[Preface]


The most blessed Father George, who had also been synkellos of	3 Tarasios, the most holy patriarch of 
Constantinople, a man of distinction and great learning, after he had perused and thoroughly investigated many 
chronographers and historians, composed with all accuracy a succinct chronicle from Adam down to 
Diocletian, the Roman emperor who persecuted the Christians. He made a very exact study of the dates, 
reconciled their divergences, corrected them, and set them together in a manner surpassing all his predecessors. 
He recorded the lives and dates of the ancient kings of every nation and, as far as he was able, accurately 
inserted, with their dates, the bishops of the great ecumenical sees, I mean those of Rome, Constantinople, 
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, both those who had tended the Church in the right faith and those who, 
like robbers, had ruled in heresy. Since, however, he was overtaken by the end of his life and was unable to 
bring his plan to completion, but, as I have said, had carried his composition down to Diocletian when he left 
this earthly life and migrated unto the Lord (being in the Orthodox faith), he both bequeathed to me, who was 
his close	4 friend, the book he had written and provided materials with a view to completing what was 
missing. As for me, not being unaware of my lack of learning and my limited culture, I declined to do this 
inasmuch as the undertaking was above my powers. He, however, begged me very much not to shrink from it 
and leave the work unfinished, 1
 

and so forced me to take it in hand. Being thus constrained by my obedience to him to undertake a task above 
my powers, I expended an uncommon amount of labour. For I, too, after seeking out to the best of my ability 
and examining many books, have written down accurately as best I could this chronicle from Diocletian down 
to the reign of Michael and his son Theophylaktos, namely the reigns [of the emperors] and the patriarchs and 
their deeds, together with their dates. I did not set down anything of my own composition, but have made a 
selection from the ancient historians and prose writers and have consigned to their proper places the events of 
every year, arranged without confusion. In this manner the readers may be able to know in which year of each 
emperor what event took place, be it military or ecclesiastical or civic or popular or of any other kind; for I 
believe that one who reads the actions of the ancients derives no small benefit from so doing. May anyone who 
finds in this my work anything of value give proper thanks to God and, for the sake of the Lord, pray on behalf 
of me who am uneducated and sinful; and if he finds aught that is wanting, may he ascribe it to my ignorance 
and the idleness of my groveling mind, and for­ give me for the sake of the Lord; for God is pleased when one 
has done one's best.











2
 
Genealogy

Diocletian and Maximianus  Herculius reigned  jointly  at the same	5
time.
Their children:
Maximianus

Maxentius, who became a usurper in Rome
Theodora, who was married	Fausta, wife of to Constantius, father 
of	Constantine the Constantine the 
Great.	Great Constantius begat Constantine
by his first wife Helena
When those [two] resigned the Empire, the Caesars who had been 
appointed by them both reigned at the same time, namely Maximianus 
Galerius, Diocletian's son in law by his daughter Valeria, and 
Constantius. The latter married Theodora, daughter of Herculius, and 
begat:
Constantius, father of Gallus and Julian the Apostate 
Anaballianos
Constantia, wife of Licinius.
By the god loving Helena he begat: Constantine the Great.
The latter, by Fausta daughter of Herculius, begat:
Crispus
Constantius 
Constantine
Constans
Helena, wife of Julian the Apostate.
3






Chronographia	6
From Diocletian to the emperors Michael and Theophylaktos


[AM 5777 (AD 284/ 5)
Year of the divine Incarnation 277
Diocletian, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 1st year Varraches, emperor of the Persians (17 years), 15th year
Gaius, 29th bishop of Rome3 (15 years), 7th year Hymenaios, 28th bishop of Jerusalem4 (24 years), 13th year 
Theonas, 16th bishop of Alexandria (19 years), 11th year Tyrannos, 19th bishop of Antioch (13 years), 2nd 
year


[AM 5778, AD 285/6)
Diocletian, 2nd year Varraches, 16th year Gaius, 8th year Hymenaios, 14th year Theonas, 12th year Tyrannos, 
3rd year

[AM 57791 AD 286/7)
Diocletian, 3rd year Varraches, 17th year Gaius, 9th year Hymenaios, 15th year Theonas, 13th year Tyrannos, 
4th year
5
 



 

Diocletian, 4th year
Vararanes, emperor of the Persians (1 year), 1st year 
Gaius, 10th year Hymenaios, 16th year Theonas, 14th year Tyrannos, 5th year
In this year Diocletian appointed Maximianus Herculius as partner in his rule, it being his fourth year.

 

Diocletian, 5th year
Narses, 7th emperor of the Persians (8 years), 1st year 
Gaius, 11th year Hymenaios, 17th year Theonas, 15th year Tyrannos, 6th year



 

Diocletian, 6th year Narses, 2nd year Gaius, 12th year Hymenaios, 18th year Theonas, 16th year Tyrannos, 7th 
year
In this year Diocletian and Maximianus Herculius razed to the ground Hobousiris and Koptos, cities of Thebes 
in Egypt, which had revolted from Roman rule.
6
 





 

Diocletian, 7th year Narses, 3rd year Gaius, 13th year Hymenaios, 19th year Theonas, 17th year Tyrannos, 8th 
year

 

Diocletian, 8th year Narses, 4th year Gaius, 14th year Hymenaios, 20th year Theonas, 18th year Tyrannos, 9th 
year

 
Diocletian, 9th year Narses, 5th year Gaius, 15th year Hymenaios, 21st year Theonas, 19th year Tyrannos, 10th 
year
In this year Diocletian and Maximianus Herculius appointed	7 Constantius and Maximianus Galerius as 
Caesars. Diocletian gave his daughter to Galerius in marriage and Maximianus Herculius joined his daughter, 
Theodora, to Constantius, though each already had a wife whom he divorced out of affection for the emperors.
7
 


 

Diocletian, 10th year Narses, 6th year
Marcellinus, bishop of Rome (2 years), 1st year 1
Hymenaios, 22nd year
Peter the Martyr, bishop of Alexandria (11 years), 1st year Tyrannos, 11th year
In this year Alexandria along with Egypt was led into revolt by Achilleus but did not hold out against the 
Roman attack, during which very many were killed and those responsible for the revolt paid the penalty.

 

Diocletian, 11th year Narses, 7th year Marcellinus, 2nd year Hymenaios, 23rd year Peter, 2nd year Tyrannos,  
12th year
8
 

In this year Diocletian and Maximianus Herculius caused a great and most terrible persecution of the 
Christians and martyred many myriads, devising all kinds of tortures and working much harm. Anyone who 
consults the eighth book of Eusebios Pamphilou's Ecclesiastical History will know about these events.

AM 5788 [AD 295/6]

Year of the divine Incarnation 288
Diocletian, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 12th year Narses, 7th emperor of the Persians (8 years), 8th 
year Eusebios, 30th bishop of Rome (1 year), 1st year2 Hymenaios, 28th bishop of Jerusalem (24 years), 24th 
year Peter, 17th bishop of Alexandria (n years), 3rd year Tyrannos, 19th bishop of Antioch (13 years), 13th 
year
In this year, after Amandus and Aelianus had led a revolution in Gaul,   Maximianus   Herculius   went   out   
and crushed   them.	8 Krasos,  too, rose up and gained control of Britain while the Quinquegentians took 
Africa and Achilleus Egypt. However, the prefect Asklepiodotos destroyed Krasos after the latter had held 
control of Britain for three years. In Gaul, Constantius the Caesar met with an unexpected reversal of fortune, 
for in a period of six hours of the same day he was both seen being defeated and revealed victorious. Indeed, 
when the Alamans had just overwhelmed Constantius' army and pursued it right up to the walls, Constantius 
followed at the rear of his fleeing army. And when, the gates being closed, he was unable to enter within the 
walls, the enemy were actually stretching out their hands to seize him. But then ropes were let down from the 
wall and he was dragged up. Once inside he exhorted his men, led them out, and gained a brilliant victory over

9
 


the Alamans, of whom six thousand fell. Maximianus Herculius overcame the Quinquegentians in Africa. 
Diocletian destroyed Achilleus in Alexandria. With Diocletian was Constantius' son Constantine who as a 
young man distinguished himself in the war. The sight of him moved Diocletian to envy and he planned to 
destroy him treacherously. But God preserved him miraculously and restored him to his father.


 
Diocletian, 13th year
Hormisdas, emperor of the Persians (6 years), 1st year 
Miltiades, bishop of Rome (4 years), 1st year Zabdas, 29th bishop of Jerusalem (10 years), 1st year
IO
 


]

Peter, 3rd year Tyrannos, 14th year
In this year the army commander Veterius mildly harassed the Christians in the army, after which the 
persecution began to smoulder against all.

(AM 5790, AD 297/8]
Diocletian, 14th year Hormisdas, 2nd year Miltiades, 2nd year Zabdas, 2nd year Peter, 4th year
Vitalius, 20th bishop of Antioch (6 years), 1st year


 
Diocletian, 15th year Hormisdas, 3rd year Miltiades, 3rd year Zabdas, 3rd year
11
 



Peter, 5th year Vitalius, 2nd year

[AM 5792, AD 299/300]
Diocletian, 16th year Hormisdas, 4th year Miltiades, 4th year Zabdas, 4th year Peter, 6th year Vitalius, 3rd year

(AM 5793, AD 300/1]
Diocletian, 17th year Hormisdas, 5th year
Silvester, 32nd bishop of Rome (28 years), 1st year 
Zabdas, 5th year Peter, 7th year Vitalius, 4th year
9 In this year Maximianus Galerius was sent out by Diocletian against the Persian emperor Narses who had at 
that time overrun Syria and was plundering it. In the first battle after they met, near Kallinikon and Karrhai, 
Galerius was defeated. On returning in flight he met Diocletian travelling in a carriage. However, Diocletian 
did not receive the Caesar in a manner appropriate to his rank, but made him run a considerable distance in 
front of the carriage. Later, after a large army had been collected, the Caesar Maximianus Galerius was again 
sent out to do battle with Narses, this time with better luck, since he attempted and achieved what no one else 
had managed. For he chased Narses into inner Persia, slaughtered his entire army, captured his wives, children, 
and sisters and everything he had with him quantities of treasure and distinguished Persians. Returning with 
these, he was welcomed and honoured by Diocletian who was then based in Mesopotamia. Both separately and 
in concert they waged many campaigns against many of the barbarians, all successfully. Exalted by these 
successes Diocletian demanded that the Senate make obeisance to him and not merely salute him as protocol 
had previously required. He adorned the imperial vestments and footwear with gold and pearls and precious 
stones.
While Constantius'   son Constantine   was in the East and in
I2
 



Palestine espousing the cause of the Christians, Galerius Maximianus saw how he was enhancing his position 
through his intelligence of mind, strength of body, and aptitude in education, and having learnt by divination 
that this man would put an end to his tyranny and his religion, planned to murder him treacherously. But 
through divine providence Constantine, like David, learned of the plot and escaped to safety and the protection 
of his own father, and with him gave bounteous thanks to Christ who had saved him.
 




[AM 57941 AD 301/2)
Diocletian, 18th year Hormisdas, 6th year Silvester, 2nd year Zabdas, 6th year Peter, 8th year Vitalius, 5th year
In this year, persuaded by the magician Theoteknos, Galerius Maximianus was sacrificing to demons and 
taking oracles. Having crept into his cave, Theoteknos gave him an oracle to raise a persecution of Christians. 
He invented the Memoirs of the Saviour and 

sent these everywhere as an insult and ordered school teachers to teach			10 
them to their pupils with the intention of ridiculing our mystery.

(AM 5795 1 AD 302/3)
Diocletian, 19th year
Sabores, 9th emperor of Persia (70 years), 1st year
Silvester, 3rd year Zabdas, 7th year Peter, 9th year Vitalius, 6th year

In this year imperial orders were given that the Christian churches were to be destroyed, the sacred books be 
burnt, and the clergy and all Christians be handed over for torture and be compelled to sacrifice to idols. This 
was the most terrifying persecution of all, producing countless martyrs.

15
 


(AM 5796, AD 303/4]
Diocletian, 20th year Sabores, 2nd year Silvester, 4th year Zabdas, 8th year Peter, 10th year (Vitalius, 7th year)
In this year Diocletian and Maximianus Herculius in their madness gave up their rule and assumed private 
status. Diocletian lived privately in his own city at Salon in Dalmatia while Maximianus Herculius lived in 
Lykaonia. Earlier they had celebrated a triumph in Rome in which the mass [of captives taken] from Narses 
together with his wives, children, and sisters were led before their carriages. After this they retired to live in 
private, and appointed in their place Galerius Maximianus to rule the East and Constantius the West. The latter 
was satisfied with a small share of the Empire, was very gentle and kindly in manner and did not concern 
himself with the public treasury. Rather he wanted his subjects to have riches. So restrained was he in the 
acquisition of riches that he pro­ vided public banquets and honoured many of his friends at drinking parties 
and so was much loved among the Gauls, who contrasted him with the severe Diocletian and the bloodthirsty 
Maximianus Herculius from whom they had escaped because of him. He died
16
 


in Britain after ruling eleven years, having earlier announced, in the presence of the entire army, that his own 
first born son Constantine should succeed him as emperor. His other sons, born of the same father .as 
Constantine, were still alive, namely Constantius and Anaballianos, also called Dalmatius,  who were born to 
Herculius'11 daughter Theodora. For Constantine was the son of Constantius' first wife Helena. Their father 
Constantius was the grandson of the emperor Claudius, while Galerius was Diocletian's son in law, being 
married to his daughter Valeria.
Next Galerius Maximianus went to Italy and appointed two Caesars. He placed his own son Maximianus in 
charge of the East and Severus in charge of Italy. But the troops in Rome proclaimed Maxentius, son of 
Maximianus Herculius as emperor. As a result Herculius, eager for the throne once again, attempted to depose 
his own son Maxentius and to kill his son in law Constantius by treachery. But he was hindered in the attempt 
against his son by the troops, while the plot against his son in law was revealed by his daughter Fausta. He was 
killed after these evil acts. Eusebios of Caesarea states that Diocletian, having taken leave of his senses, retired 
from the throne along with Herculius and took up a private life. And whereas the latter ended his life by 
hanging, Diocletian, exhausted by a chronic illness, withered away. On the other hand, Gelasios, bishop of the 
same Caesarea, states that the two, having changed their minds and longing for the throne again, were killed by 
the common decision of the Senate. So with them out of the way and with the death of the pro Christian 
Constantius, the Empire, as I have said, fell to Constantine Augustus and Maximianus  Galerius.

 



1 8
 

AM 5797 (AD 304/ 5)
Year of the divine Incarnation 297
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (32 years) 1st year Sabores, 9th emperor of the Persians (70 years), 3rd 
year Silvester, 32nd bishop of Rome (18 years), 5th year Zabdas, 30th bishop of Jerusalem (10 years), 9th year
Peter the Martyr, 17th bishop of Alexandria (11 years), 11th year Philogonos, bishop of Antioch (5 years), 1st 
year
In this year the most holy and most Christian Constantine became emperor of the Romans in Gaul and Britain.  
At the same	12 time the following four ruled with him, Maximianus Galerius with the two Caesars, Severus 
and Galerius' son Maximinus, and Herculius' son Maxentius, who had been proclaimed as emperor by the 
troops in Rome. These were eager to outdo each other in their persecution of the Christians. The usurper 
Maxentius, while ruling Rome illegally, committed quite terrible crimes, acts of adultery with the wives of 
dignitaries, murders, rapine, and the like. In the east Maximinus was carrying out even worse crimes, so that 
the two greatest criminals, allotted to East and West, were rekindling the war against the Christians. At that 
time the Romans also pro­ claimed Licinius as Caesar, wishing to gratify Constantine whose brother in law he 
was. For he had married Constantine's sister Constantia and was falsely pretending to be practising our 
religion. It should be understood that Severus had died.
In this same year Peter, bishop of Alexandria, who had been imprisoned by order of Maximianus Galerius and 
his son Maximinus, was beheaded and underwent martyrdom gloriously. It was he who excommunicated Arius, 
who was a deacon of his church and who later, as leader of an erroneous heresy, caused many to abandon their 
piety. And there were many others who in the service of Christ won the martyr's crown at the hands of these 
tyrants. Among them are Phileas, bishop of Thmouis in Egypt; Peleus and Neilos, bishops of Egypt; Anthimos, 
bishop of Nicomedia; Tyrannion, bishop of Tyre; Silvanus, bishop of Emesa; and Silvanus, bishop of Gaza; 
Lucianus, presbyter of Antioch; Zenobios, presbyter of Sidon; Pamphilos, presbyter of Caesarea; and countless 
others.




19
 



This Galerius Maximianus was such a fornicator that his subjects
13 sought anxiously where they could hide their wives. He was so absorbed with the trickery of deceitful 
demons that he refrained from tasting anything without the support of divination. He ordered total destruction 
of the Christians not so much because of his own impiety as to plunder their property. Divine retribution 
followed him because of his immense licentiousness and the intolerable harm he did to the Christians. For the 
organ of his intemperance developed a grievous ulcer, too virulent to be cured by human means, and a mass of 
feeding worms infested his corrupt parts; for he was also obese. He, realizing that he had been struck because 
of his unjust murders, wrote ordinances to all places on behalf of the Christians, bidding them do everything as 
they wished and to pray on his behalf. When this had happened, his worst suffering was immediately relieved 
beyond his hopes by the Christians' prayer, but with the wound not yet healed entirely, he began to rage all the 
more, continuing with his lawless deeds. Immediately once again there ensued wars and revolts, famine and 
plagues and incessant droughts, so that the living were insufficient to bury the dead. Thunderbolts and terrors 
were sent forth so that each person thought only about himself and many of the ordinances remained in 
abeyance.




























20
 

































21
 

(AM 5798, AD 305/6)
Constantine, 2nd year Sabores, 4th year Silvester, 6th year
Hermon, bishop of Jerusalem (9 years), 1st year Achillas, bishop of Alexandria (1 year), 1st year Philogonos, 
2nd year

[AM 5799, AD 306/7]
Constantine, 3rd year Sabores, 5th year Silvester, 7th year Hermon, 2nd year
Alexander, 19th bishop of Alexandria (23 years), 1st year Philogonos, 3rd year

(AM 5800, AD 307/8]
Constantine, 4th year Sabores, 6th year Silvester, 8th year Hermon, 3rd year Alexander, 2nd year Philogonos, 
4th year


 
Constantine, 5th year Sabores, 7th year Silvester, 9th year Hermon, 4th year Alexander, 3rd year Philogonos, 
5th year


 
Constantine, 6th year Sabores, 8th year Silvester, 10th year Hermon, 5th year

22
 



Alexander, 4th year
Paulinus, bishop of Antioch (5 years), 1st year
In this year the most holy Constantine set about the dissolution of the tyrants. The impious Maxentius, having 
built a bridge of ships over the river which flows by Rome, drew up his forces against Constantine the Great. 
The great Constantine feared the sorcery of Maxentius, who cut up newborn babes for his lawless divination.	
		14 
While he was in great distress, there appeared to him at the sixth hour of the day the sacred Cross made of 
light, with the inscription 'In this conquer'. And the Lord appeared to him in a vision during the night, saying, 
'Use what has been shown to you and conquer.' Then, having devised a golden cross which exists to this day, 
he ordered it to be carried forward into battle. When the battle was joined, those with Maxentius were defeated 
and the majority of them perished. Maxentius fled with the survivors but the bridge collapsed by the power of 
God and he was thrown into the river, just as Pharaoh had been long ago with his army, so that the river was 
filled with horses and their drowning riders. The citizens of Rome, who had begged him to come to their aid 
and were now released from the tyranny of the wicked Maxentius, garlanded the city and received with joy the 
victorious Constantine together with the victory bringing Cross, proclaiming him as their saviour.	 

AM 5803 (AD 310/11)
Year of the divine Incarnation 303
Constantine, emperor of the Romans  (32 years), 7th year 
Sabores, 9th emperor of the Persians (70 years), 9th year Silvester, 32nd bishop of Rome (28 years), 11th year 
Hermon, 31st bishop of Jerusalem  (9 years), 6th year Alexander, 19th bishop of Alexandria  (23 years), 5th 
year Paulinus, 22nd bishop of Antioch (5 years), 2nd year
In this year, having gained control of Rome, Constantine, God's accomplice, ordered before all else that the 
relics of the holy martyrs



23
 

be collected and handed over for a holy burial. And the Romans celebrated a victory festival, honouring the 
Lord and the life giving Cross for seven days and exalting the victorious Constantine.


 

Constantine, 8th year Sabores, 10th year Silvester, 12th year Hermon, 7th year Alexander, 6th year Paulinus, 
4th year

(AM 5805, AD 312/13)
Constantine, 9th year Sabores, nth year Silvester, 13th year Hermon, 8th year Alexander, 7th year Paulinus, 5th 
year
In this year, Maximinus, Galerius' son, who had rushed in and given the Empire to himself, ended his life in 
Cilicia in disgrace. When his father, Galerius Maximianus, heard that Maxentius, the
15 son of Herculius, had fallen in Rome to Constantine through the power of the Cross, he took fright and 
lifted the persecution of the Christians.









24
 

(AM 5806, AD 313/14)
Constantine, 10th year Sabores, 12th year Silvester, 14th year Hermon, 9th year Alexander, 8th year Paulinus, 
6th year
In this year the most holy Constantine, driven by God's zeal, together with the Caesar Licinius campaigned 
against Maximianus Galerius who governed the East. Galerius responded by taking the field and met them 
with an enormous force, relying, like Maxentius, on the prophecies of demons and on magic tricks. With the 
life giving cross going on before Constantine the Great, the tyrant was routed as soon as battle was joined and 
his army slaughtered; he shed his imperial regalia and, disguised as a common soldier, fled with a few of his 
closest supporters. Going from village to village, he gathered the priests of the idols, the seers, and those famed 
for magic and his own prophets and murdered them as cheats.

 

Constantine, 11th year Sabores, 13th year Silvester, 15th year
Makarios, 32nd bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 1st year Alexander, 9th year
Eustathios, 23rd bishop of Antioch  (18 years), 1st year









25
 


In this year, when Galerius Maximianus was on the point of being taken alive by the most pious Constantine, 
divine anger intervened and destroyed him. For a flame, kindled in the depth of his innards and his marrow, 
left him prostrate on the ground, gasping for breath with an unbearable pain, so that both his eyes popped out 
and left the sinner blind, while at the same time, as a result of immense inflammation, his flesh became putrid 
and fell from his bones. So, having rotted away, he vomited up his God opposing soul.

(AM 5808, AD 315/16)
Constantine, 12th year Sabores, 14th year Silvester, 16th year Makarios, 2nd year Alexander, 10th year 
Eustathios, 2nd year
In this year the godlike Constantine marked off and allotted a portion of the Roman territory to Licinius, who 
had campaigned with him and who deceitfully pretended to be a Christian.  Constantine proclaimed him 
emperor and demanded from him pledges that he would do no harm to the Christians. Thereupon through the 
grace of Christ the persecution of us by the tyrants ceased.


 

Constantine, 13th year Sabores, 15th year












26 


Silvester, 17th year Makarios, 3rd year Alexander, 11th year Eustathios, 3rd year
 
  


AM 5810 (AD 317/18]
Year of the divine Incarnation 3IO
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (32 years), 14th year Sabores, 9th emperor of the Persians (70 years), 
16th year Silvester, 32nd bishop of Rome (28 years), 18th year Metrophanes, 1st bishop of Byzantium (10 
years), 9th year Makarios, 32nd bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 4th year Alexander, 19th bishop of Alexandria 
(23 years), 12th year Eustathios, 23rd bishop of Antioch (18 years), 4th year
In this year Constantine the Great, having become sole ruler of all the Roman lands, gave his mind entirely to 
holy matters by building churches and enriching them lavishly from public funds. First he legislated that the 
temples used for idols were to be handed over to persons consecrated to Christ (his son Crispus was 
cosignatory of this legislation); second, that only Christians were to serve in the army and to command foreign 
races and armies, while those who persisted in idolatry were to suffer capital punishment; third, that public 
business was to cease for the two weeks of Easter (i.e. the week before the Resurrection and the following 
week). Under these circumstances a deep and calm peace prevailed throughout the inhabited world and there 
was rejoicing among the faithful as whole nations came over daily to faith in Christ, accepted baptism, and 
broke up their ancestral idols. Constantine also legislated that in Egypt a cubit of the rise of the river Nile was 
to be offered to the Church and not in the Sarapion as was the pagan custom. Licinius, before he finally went 
mad, went to Antioch and there killed the magician Theoteknos and his associates after subjecting them to 
many tortures.





27
 





(AM 58II, AD 318/19)
Constantine, 15th year Sabores, 17th year Silvester, 19th year Metrophanes, 10th year Makarios, 5th year 
Alexander, 13th year Eustathios, 5th year
In this year Licinius began to set in motion a persecution of Christians. First he pursued the Christians in the 
palace, forgetful of the fall of the tyrants before him and of his agreements with Constantine the Great.  He 
also did not cease fornicating, behaving
I7 unjustly and slaughtering Christians. The godlike Constantine ordered him in rescripts to stop this madness 
but did not persuade him. Licinius brought about the death through torture of Basileus, bishop of Amaseia and, 
according to some sources, of the Forty holy Martyrs and many others.


























28 


 

Constantine, 16th year Sabores, 18th year Silvester, 20th year
Alexander, bishop of Byzantium (23 years), 1st year Makarios, 6th year
Alexander, 14th year Eustathios, 6th year
In this year in Alexandria Arius (from whom the madness is named) disclosed his own heresy before the 
congregation and brought about a schism, with the collusion of the Devil, who was unable to look upon the 
peace of the Church. A most violent earthquake shook Alexandria, with many houses collapsing and 
considerable loss of life.

 



[AM 5813, AD 320/1)
Constantine, 17th year Sabores, 19th year Silvester, 21st year Alexander, 2nd year Makarios, 7th year 
Alexander, 15th year Eustathios, 7th year
In this year Constantine the Great, having learned of the Arian movement and being considerably grieved by it, 
wrote to Alexander and Arius jointly, counselling them to end this evil controversy and be at peace with each 
other. He also sent out Hosios, bishop of Cordova, to Alexandria to look into the Arian question, and to the 
East to set right the easterners who by ancient custom were celebrating Easter in the Jewish manner.  He 
returned unsuccessful in both missions.
In this year Constantine the Great appointed his son Constans as Caesar and sent him to Gaul.















30
 





 

Constantine, 18th year Sabores, 20th year Silvester, 22nd year Alexander, 3rd year Makarios, 8th year 
Alexander,	6th year Eustathios,  8th year
In this year, as some say, Constantine the Great together with his son Crispus was baptized in Rome by 
Silvester. The inhabitants of Old Rome preserve even today the baptismal font as evidence that he was baptized 
in Rome by Silvester after the removal of the tyrants. The easterners, on the other hand, claim that he was 
baptized on his death bed in Nicomedia by the Arian Eusebios of Nicomedia, at which place he happened to 
die. They claim that he had deferred baptism in the hope of being baptized in the river
Jordan. In my view it is more likely to be true that he was baptized
18  by Silvester in Rome and the decrees addressed to Miltiades that are ascribed to him are Arian forgeries, 
since they were eager to win some glory from this or else wanted to denigrate this completely pious emperor 
by revealing in this fashion that he was not baptized, which is absurd and false. For if he had not been baptized 
at the Council of Nicaea, he could not have taken the holy sacraments nor joined in the prayers of the holy 
Fathers, something that is most absurd both to say and to hold.  Other Arians and pagans accuse Constantine 
the Great of being illegitimate, but they too are lying. For his imperial line goes back even earlier than 
Diocletian. Indeed, his father Constantius was a grandson of the emperor Claudius and he fathered Constantine 
the Great by his first wife Helena. He had other sons by Theodora, Maximianus Herculius' daughter, the sister 
of that Maxentius who was usurper at Rome and who was destroyed by Constantine at the Milvian bridge 
(when the sign of the Cross appeared to him in the sky) and a sister also of Fausta, the wife of Constantine the 
Great. And let no one be amazed if, being pagans



31
 



before their baptism, father and son married two sisters. Their family trees are as given below.
19
Constantius  the Great
by Theodora, daughter of Herculius, sired
Constantius	Anaballianos	Constantia father of Gallus	(also called Gallus	(wife of Licinius)
and Julian the Apostate	Dalmatius) father of
Dalmatius the younger

by Helena he sired Constantine the Great alone
Constantine the Great
by Fausta, daughter of Herculius, sired
Crispus, Constantine,  Constantius,  Constans, and Helena (wife of Julian the Apostate)  
















32
 


AM 5815 (AD 322/3)
Year of the divine Incarnation 315
Constantine, emperor of the Romans  (32 years), 19th year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (10 years), 21st 
year Silvester, 32nd bishop of Rome (28 years), 23rd year Alexander, 2nd bishop of Byzantium  (23 years), 
4th year Makarios, 32nd bishop  of Jerusalem  (20 years)1  9th year
 
Alexander 19th bishop of Alexandria (23 years) 17th year
Eustathios 23rd bishop of Antioch (18 years) 9th year

In this year the pious Constantine seeing that Licinius was continuing his persecution in a more enraged 
manner and was planning 			        20
a plot against his benefactor took up arms against him on land and sea. In the clash of open war in Bithynia 
Licinius was captured alive at Chrysopolis and handed over to Constantine who with his customary humanity 
granted him his life and sent him to be imprisoned in Thessalonica. Not much later Licinius having hired some 
barbarians would have begun a revolt had not the most gentle Constantine learned of it in advance and ordered 
his decapitation by the sword. And thus at last the affairs of the Christian state enjoyed perfect peace with the 
tyrants put out of the way through the might of the life giving Cross, and with God's partner Constantine alone 
controlling the Roman Empire. With his own sons appointed as Caesars he had the benefit of peace. He was a 
man resplendent in all respects manly in spirit, sharp in mind well educated in speech in justice upright ready 
as a benefactor dignified in appearance, great in the barbarian wars through courage and fortune and invincible 
in civil wars strong and unswerving in his faith. As a result he gained victory over all his enemies by prayer. 
And so he built churches throughout the country for the conversion of the nations to the honour of God. In the 
same year also Martinus was killed after a three month







33
 


usurpation. Licinianus the Caesar, the son of Licinius, was stripped of his office by Constantine.
In the same year, Narses, the son of the Persian emperor, overran Mesopotamia and captured the city of Amida. 
Constantine's son, the Caesar Constantius, made war on him and, after a minor set­ back, finally conquered him 
in battle to such a degree that he even killed Narses.






















34
 



AM 5816 (AD 323/4)	21
Year of the divine Incarnation 316
Constantine, emperor of the Romans  (32 years), 20th year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 22nd 
year Silvester, bishop of Rome (28 years), 24th year
Alexander, bishop of Byzantium (23 years), 5th year Makarios, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 10th year 
Alexander, bishop of Alexandria (23 years), r 8th year Eustathios, bishop of Antioch (18 years), 10th year
In this year the vicennalia of Constantine Augustus' imperial rule was celebrated. And there took place the 
First holy and ecumenical Synod of the three hundred and eighteen fathers, of whom many were miracle 
workers and equal to the angels, carrying the stigmata of Christ on their bodies from previous persecutions. 
Among them were Paphnoutios, Spyridon, Makarios and Jacob of Nisibis, miracle workers who had raised the 
dead and done many wondrous things. The holy synod was held at Nicaea in Bithynia and was presided over 
by Makarios of Jerusalem and Alexander of Alexandria, with Viton and Vincent representing the bishop of 
Rome. As the Church of Antioch was vacant, the synod appointed over it Eustathios, bishop of Beroia in Syria. 
Alexander of Byzantium was not present at the synod because of his extreme old age and ill health. Presbyters 
took his place. Paul of Neocaesarea was present at this council as was a great crowd of other holy men 
distinguished by their lives and culture, of whom Eusebios Pamphilou has recorded much praise in the third 
book of his treatise addressed to the emperor. The most Christian emperor liberally provided for everybody's 
needs. This holy and ecumenical synod, with the cooperation of the holy and consubstantial Trinity, deposed 
Arius and his sympathizers, Eusebios of Nicomedia, Theognis of Nicaea and those with them (except for 
Eusebios Pamphilou, who for the present accepted the term 'consubstantial')  and sent them into exile. The all 
praiseworthy emperor Constantine was present at the synod and was an associate in all its actions that were 
agreeable to God. He ordered that others be ordained to   22 replace those banished, and published a written 
exposition of the faith that is today recited in every orthodox church. As the impious
35
 



Arius was at that time present at the synod and being condemned, Eusebios of Nicomedia, Theognis, Maris, 
Narkissos, Theophantos and Patrophilos contended on behalf of Arius and, having put together a blasphemous 
statement of faith, presented it to the synod. When this was tom up, its authors, except for Secundus of 
Ptolemais in Egypt and Theonas of Marmarike, wheeled about and condemned
Arius. These two were expelled and anathematized with Arius. All then dictated, subscribed to, and acclaimed 
the holy creed of the faith, including the all pious emperor. The assembly was then dismissed.
In this year Crispus, the emperor's son, a Christian, died. Also Byzantium began to be built.
The First holy ecumenical Synod was held on 20 May in the 12th indiction of the 20th year of Constantine the 
Great. The synod wrote an encyclical letter to   Alexandria, Libya, and Pentapolis to announce the expulsion of 
Arius, Secundus and Theonas. The letter also referred to Meletios, who was to remain quietly as an ordinary person 
in his own city; those who had been ordained by him through a secret ordination were confirmed. There was also a 
decision that Easter was no longer to conform to Jewish custom, but rather it was to be celebrated on Sunday as in 
the Italian rite. Likewise the all pious emperor sent out rescripts everywhere ordaining and confirming the 
declarations of the holy synod, while rejecting Arius along with his supporters; they were to be designated as 
Porphyrians, their writings were to be burned, and the penalty for non compliance was death. He published also an 
imperial law enforcing these provisions. As the festival of the vicennalia of his rule came round at this juncture, he 
invited all the Fathers to the feast, reclined at dinner with them and honoured them gloriously. He kissed 
Paphnoutios and other confessors on their eyes that had been gouged out and their limbs that had been mutilated in 
the persecution, receiving a blessing from them. He
23 exhorted all the bishops to maintain the peace and to refrain from reviling their neighbours. The pamphlets which 
some had published against one another he burned in a fire, confirming under oath that if he were to see a bishop 
committing adultery; he would readily shelter him in his purple cloak. He bestowed many gifts on all the churches, 
exhorted the rulers of the nations to honour their priests, and sent them all on their way rejoicing.
As the emperor was rebuked by the pagan philosophers in Byzantium on the grounds that he had acted improperly 
and contrary to the customs of the Roman emperors by changing the religion, the emperor resolved to send one of 
the philosophers to bishop
 



Alexander to debate with him. Alexander was a holy man, but lacking in education. To the philosopher, who 
was skilled in dialectic and talked till his tongue ached, he said 'I order you in the name of Jesus Christ the true 
God to be quiet and not to talk,' and he was immediately silenced and made speechless.
The emperor ordered Makarios, bishop of Jerusalem, who was present at the synod, to search out on his return 
the site of the holy Resurrection and that of Golgotha of the skull and the life giving wood.
In this year he crowned Helena, his god minded mother, and assigned to her as empress the privilege of 
coinage. She had a vision which ordered her to go to Jerusalem and to bring to light the sacred sites which had 
been buried by the impious. She begged her son Constantine to fulfill these commands sent to her from God. 
And he acted in obedience to her.
When, moved by a divine sign, the pious Constantine decided to build a city bearing his own name on the plain 
before Troy above the tomb of Ajax where, so they say, the Greeks, campaigning against Troy, had established 
their anchorage, God commanded him in a dream to build the present Constantinople at Byzantium. Having 
built it lavishly with fine houses, he transplanted notables from Rome, and having selected people according to 
their descent from other places, and graciously given them large houses, he made them inhabit the city. At that 
time the Christ loving emperor built the      24
church of Holy Eirene, and of the Apostles and of St Mokios and of the Archangel at Anaplous. He ordered that 
the pagan temples of idols be destroyed and churches built. It was then that the temple of Asklepios at Aigai 
and that of Aphrodite at Aphaka and many others were demolished. He made a gift of the revenue from these to 
the churches. At that time many races who had earlier overrun Roman territory came forward to be baptized 
because of the miracles performed by captive priests who had been taken prisoner during the reign of 
Gallienus. These included Goths, Celts, and the western Galatians. And now, under Constantine the victorious, 
many races were baptized, hastening to Christ. The inland Indians were converted to Christ when Meropios, a 
philosopher from Tyre, taking along his disciples Aidesios and Frumentius, arrived there to investigate the 
region and taught them the word of God. Athanasios appointed Frumentius the first bishop among them. 
Similarly the Iberians were converted in his reign when they saw the miracles performed by a captive Christian 
woman, and the mist that fell on the eyes of their emperor when hunting. Rufinus relates these events, having 
heard   them   from   that   very   emperor   of   the Iberians,
 



Bakkourios. Likewise the Armenians were fully converted under him, receiving their salvation through 
Tiridates their emperor and Gregory their bishop. It was then, too, that there flourished Dorotheos, bishop of 
Tyre, a man who had suffered much under Diocletian, experiencing both exile and torture. He left behind many 
writings in both Latin and Greek, being very skilled in both languages and very learned through his natural 
cleverness. He wrote an accurate account of the bishops of Byzantium and many other places. After his return 
from exile, he was ·present at the synod and then, after regaining his own see, he survived until Julian the 
Apostate. And since that cursed man did not maltreat Christians openly, but in secret through his officers, the 
blessed Dorotheos again went to Odyssopolis where, arrested by Julian's officers and subjected to many 
outrages, he died in extreme old age under torture for his confession of Christ, being by then 107 years old.
















38 
 

AM 5817 (AD 324/5)	25
Year of the divine Incarnation 317
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (32 years), 21st year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 23rd 
year Silvester, bishop of Rome (28 years), 25th year
Alexander, bishop of Constantinople (23 years), 6th year Makarios, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 11th year 
Alexander, bishop of Alexandria (23 years), 19th year Eustathios, bishop of Antioch (18 years), 11th year
In this year Jews and Persians, seeing that Christianity was flourishing in Persia, brought an accusation before 
the Persian emperor Sabores against Symeon, archbishop of Ctesiphon, and against the bishop of Seleukeia. 
They were charged with being friends of the Roman emperor and spies of Persian affairs. As a result a great 
persecution took place in Persia and a great many people were adorned with martyrdom for Christ's sake. 
Among these Ousthaxades, Sabores' teacher, the archbishop Symeon, and, in addition to many others, a 
hundred clerics and bishops were martyred on a single day, as well as countless masses of others. Of these 
martyrs 18,000 are conspicuous for the terrifying tortures of an unnatural kind which destroyed them at the 
hands of the utterly godless Sabores. It was then that bishop Akepsimas, the presbyter Aeithalas, and Terboulia, 
sister of archbishop Symeon, were martyred with a great many other women. The most godlike emperor 
Constantine advised Sabores by means of a letter to spare the Christians and begged him to cease from this 
enormous cruelty. This letter was brilliantly composed and most godlike but it did not persuade him.
In the same year the godlike Constantine sent the blessed Helena to Jerusalem with money and soldiers to seek 
the life giving Cross of the Lord. Makarios, patriarch of Jerusalem, having met the empress with due honour, 
made the search for the longed for life giving wood along with her, in tranquility, with earnest prayers and 
fasting.
When these things had been done, the site was quickly revealed to	26 
Makarios by God in the place where the temple and statue of the impure demon Aphrodite stood. The divinely 
crowned Helena, using her imperial authority, immediately arranged for a large



41
number of workmen to destroy the temple, which had been lavishly built long ago by Aelius Hadrian, raze it to 
its foundations, and remove the [excavated] soil. Straight away the Holy Sepulchre and the place of the Skull 
were revealed, and close by, to the east, there were three buried crosses. After searching, they even found the 
nails. But they were all at a loss to know which cross was the Lord's. The blessed Helena was particularly 
grieved, but the well named bishop Makarios solved the problem by his faith. For by bringing each of the 
crosses to a distinguished lady who was in despair and near death, he discovered which of them was the Lord's. 
For barely had its shadow come close to the sick woman when she, though hardly able to breathe or move, 
suddenly and immediately through God's power leaped up and began glorifying God in a loud voice. The all 
pious Helena with fear and great joy took up the life giving wood and brought part of it with the nails to her 
son, and having placed the rest of it in a silver casket, she handed it over to bishop Makarios as a memorial for 
later generations. Then she also ordered that churches be built at the Holy Sepulchre and at Calvary in the 
name of her son, where the life giving wood was discovered, and also at Bethlehem and on the Mount of 
Olives. And so she returned to the all praiseworthy Constantine. He, having welcomed her with joy, placed the 
particle of the life giving wood in a golden chest, handing it over to the bishop for safe keeping. Of the nails he 
forged some on to his helmet, and inserted others in his horse's bridle, so that the word of the prophet might be 
fulfilled, saying, 'on that day there will be on the bridle of the horse holiness unto the Lord Almighty.'  The 
same all praiseworthy Constantine wrote to the well named Makarios to hurry with the building and sent out an 
officer of works with an abundance of money with orders to build the Holy Places so that there would be 
nothing so beautiful in the 
27 entire inhabited world. He also wrote to the governors of the province to join in the work earnestly from the 
public account. The emperor in splendid celebration gave thanks to God for having made such good things 
happen in his time.
In the same year the well named Makarios, patriarch of Jerusalem, died in peace and Maximus succeeded to 
his throne, a gentle and distinguished man who had endured many tortures for God during the persecution and 
had lost his right eye.
During the same period the blessed Helena also died in the Lord at the age of 80, having made many 
exhortations to her son concerning the Christian religion. She was buried in the church of the Holy Apostles in 
Constantinople, which her son Constantine built for the burial of deceased Christian emperors.  The blessed 
Helena
42 


was the first to be buried in it, and was honoured by magnificent night long memorial services. The sacred 
maidens in Jerusalem, whom the god minded Helena had entertained and served in person at the table, like a 
serving maid, praised her forever with divine services. 
The emperor ordered Eusebios Pamphilou to prepare copies of the sacred books for use in the churches of 
Constantinople, for which he supplied him with public money.








































43 



 

Year of the divine Incarnation 318
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (32 years), 22nd year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 24th 
year Silvester, bishop of Rome (28 years), 26th year
Alexander, bishop of Constantinople (23 years), 7th year Makarios, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 12th year 
Alexander, bishop of Alexandria (23 years), 20th year Eustathios, 23rd bishop of Antioch (18 years), 12th year
In this year the most pious and victorious Constantine campaigned against the Germans, Sarmatians, and 
Goths, and won a mighty victory
28		through the power of the Cross; and having devastated them he reduced them to absolute 
servitude.
In the same year he restored Drepana in honour of its martyr Lucian and named it by his mother's name 
Helenopolis.
In a letter to his fellow citizens which interpreted the sense of the words, Eusebios Pamphilou testified to the 
total orthodoxy of the creed of faith published at Nicaea by the fathers. Athanasios for his part, in a letter to the 
Africans, gave evidence that [Eusebios] Pamphilou had accepted the term 'consubstantial'. Theodoret, however, 
says that Eusebios Pamphilou was in agreement with the Arians, such as Eusebios of Nicomedia and his 
associates, for which reason he lent his support to the  deposition of the divine Eustathios of Antioch, and, 
having joined with them in persuading the emperor that Eustathios was rightly deposed, he caused him to be 
exiled to Illyricum.






44
 




 

Constantine, 23rd year Sabores, 25th year Silvester, 27th year Alexander, 8th year Makarios, 13th year Alexander, 21st 
year Eustathios, 13th year
In this year there began the construction of the octagonal church in Antioch.

(AM 5 820, AD 327/8)
Constantine, 24th year Sabores, 26th year Silvester, 28th year Alexander, 9th year Makarios, 14th year Alexander, 22nd 
year Eustathios, 14th year
In this year the pious Constantine, after crossing the Danube, built a stone bridge over it and subdued the Scythians.















45
 



 

Constantine, 25th year Sabores, 27th year
Mark, 32nd bishop of Rome (2 years), 1st year 
Alexander, 10th year Makarios, 15th year Alexander, 23rd year Eustathios, 15th year
In this year the pious Constantine, while founding Constantinople, decreed that it was to be styled 'New Rome' 
and ordered it to have a senate. He set up a porphyry column with a statue of himself on top of it at the place 
where he began to build the city in the western part, by the gate leading out towards Rome. He decorated the 
city and brought to it works of art and statues of bronze and marble from every province and city.


 

Constantine, 26th year Sabores, 28th year Mark, 2nd year Alexander, 11th year Makarios, 16th year














46

 

Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria  (46 years), 1st year 
Eustathios, 16th year
In this year the pious Constantine intensified the destruction  of idols and their temples and they were  
demolished  in  [various] places. The revenues from these were bestowed upon the churches of God.



 

Year of the divine Incarnation 323
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (32 years), 27th year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 29th 
year Julius, bishop of Rome (15 years), 1st year
Alexander, bishop of Constantinople  (23 years), 12th year Makarios, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 17th 
year Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria  (46 years), 2nd year Eustathios, bishop of Antioch (18 years), 17th 
year
In this year the basilica at Nicomedia was burned down by a divine fire.



 

Constantine, 28th year Sabores, 30th year Julius, 2nd year Alexander, 13th year Makarios, 18th year 
Athanasios, 3rd year Eustathios, 18th year
In this year, when the 7th indiction was about to follow, a famine occurred in the East which was so extremely 
severe that villagers gathered together in great throngs in the territory of the Antiochenes and of Kyros and 
assailed one another and stole [food] in attacks by


47
 



night and, finally, even in daylight they would break into the granaries, looting and stealing everything in the 
storehouses before they went  away. A modius of corn cost 400 pieces of silver. Constantine the Great 
graciously gave an allowance of corn to the churches in each city to provide continuous sustenance for 
widows, the poor in hostels, and for clerics. The Church in Antioch received 36,000 modii of corn.
In the same year, during a very severe earthquake in Cyprus, the city of Salamis collapsed and killed a 
considerable number.


 

Constantine, 29th year Sabores, 31st year Julius, 3rd year Alexander, 14th year Makarios, 19th year






















48 

Athanasios, 4th year
Eulalios, bishop of Antioch ( 3 years),  1st year
In this year Dalmatius was proclaimed Caesar. Kalokairos, the usurper on the island of Cyprus, did not resist 
the Roman attack. After being defeated, along with those responsible, he was executed by the Caesar 
Dalmatius at Tarsus in Cilicia by being burned alive. In the same year Arius was recalled from exile following 
a feigned repentance and sent to Alexandria. He was not accepted by Athanasios.


 

Constantine, 30th year Sabores, 32nd year Julius, 4th year Alexander, 15th year Makarios, 20th year 
Athanasios, 5th year Eulalios, 2nd year
In this year the tricennalia of the most pious and victorious Constantine was celebrated with great 
munificence.
In Antioch a star appeared in the eastern part of the sky during	30 the day, emitting much smoke as though 
from a furnace, from the third to the fifth hour.
  Arius along with Eusebios of Nicomedia and those of like mind
















49 

 

were stirred up and offered sworn statements of their orthodoxy to the emperor, who was thirsting for unity 
among the divided. They persuaded him falsely that they were in agreement with the fathers of Nicaea. 
Convinced by them, the emperor was annoyed with Athanasios for not accepting back Arius and Euzoios who 
had been deposed by Alexander, Euzoios being then a deacon. Eusebios and his supporters, having found a 
pretext, campaigned against Athanasios as a champion of the true faith.


AM 5827 (AD 334/5)
Year of the divine Incarnation 327
Constantine, emperor of the Romans  (32 years), 31st year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 33rd 
year Julius, bishop of Rome (15 years), 5th year
Alexander, bishop of Constantinople (23 years), 16th year Maximus, bishop of Jerusalem (6 years), 1st year 
Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria (46 years), 6th year Eulalios, bishop of Antioch (3 years), 3rd year
In this year the emperor's annoyance with Athanasios for not accepting back Arius and Euzoios after their 
feigned turnabout provided an opportunity for evil to the supporters of Eusebios of Nicomedia together with 
the Melitians, and they began plotting against Athanasios. First, they found fault with his ordination, even 
though Apolinarios the Syrian gave strong evidence in favour of the said ordination of Athanasios. Second, 
there was the linen clothing which his enemies alleged that the holy man used to wear. Third, they alleged 
falsely that he had sent a great quantity of gold to Philoumenos to arrange a plot against the emperor. The 
emperor, having summoned Athanasios and found that these were all lies, sent him back to Alexandria with 
[official] letters and much honour.
In the same year Ischyras concocted a plot against Athanasios in Mareotis. This man Ischyras, having disguised 
himself as a priest, travelled about celebrating mass. When Athanasios learned of this,
 



he forbade this outrageous behaviour through the presbyter 	31 
Makarios. Ischyras then fled to Eusebios of Nicomedia and accused Athanasios of having thrown the sacred 
vessels off the altar at the time of the divine service and of having burned the sacred books through the agency 
of Makarios. They also lied about the much vaunted hand of Arsenios, claiming that he had used it for magic, 
and so shamelessly slandered the holy man. When the emperor had heard of these accusations against 
Athanasios he first entrusted the inquiry to his nephew Dalmatius who was in Antioch. He later transferred the 
trial to Caesarea, but since Athanasios put it off because of Eusebios Pamphilou, he was tried at Tyre by those 
opponents of truth, particularly Eusebios of Nicomedia, who had tricked the emperor with his supposed 
longing [to see] the holy sites that had been built up and to be present at their consecration. The emperor sent 
Eusebios on his way with great honour ordering that the slanders against Athanasios be dismissed, and 
thereafter that he together with Athanasios should be present at the feast for the consecration. And so when 
they had gathered in Tyre, Maximus of Jerusalem was also present unaware of the plot against Athanasios. 
Athanasios entered the assembly of these malignant men and scattered the calumnies of his accusers like 
cobwebs, so that they, having been seen to be lying in these matters, confused everything in their rage and 
began shouting 'Remove the man who has silenced everyone by magic!' The Caesar Dalmatius, the emperor's 
nephew, and his band of soldiers were scarcely able to save Athanasios from impending death at their hands. It 
was then that Arsenios arrived in Tyre by God's providence and, when the fiction about him had been exposed, 
the enemies had recourse to the calumny of Ischyras. Because of these unendurable plots against him 
Athanasios left Tyre. The Arian thinkers, having initiated an action with only one party represented, now 
deposed Athanasios in his absence and, having taken communion with Arius and Euzoios, sent them to 
Alexandria. And so they went up to the consecration with their hands bloodied. The instigator of all these 
crimes was Eusebios of Nicomedia.
There is a true story that the great Athanasios, after fleeing from Tyre, went up to Jerusalem and, having 
offered his prayers and anointed and sanctified the churches with holy oil before the arrival of those 	32 
impious  men,  presented  himself  to  the  emperor  and explained  all the  circumstances  concerning  
himself. The all blessed Constantine, amazed at the evil of his adversaries, treated him with great honour and 
sent him with [official] letters to Alexandria.
 



After their return from the consecration, that stranger to all piety, Eusebios of Nicomedia, and also Theognis, 
Ursacius, and Patrophilos, on reaching Byzantium, were silent about the initial slanders against Athanasios and 
produced four men with the rank of bishop as false witnesses. These men dared to affirm on oath that they had 
heard Athanasios threatening to prevent the corn supply from Egypt coming to Byzantium. As a result they 
moved the Christ­ loving emperor to anger and drove him to banish the great Athanasios to Treviri in Gaul. 
With Athanasios banished, Arius once again began troubling Egypt. On being informed of this the emperor 
summoned him and asked whether he was in agreement with the teachings of Nicaea on the consubstantial. He 
swore on oath, though he was effecting a trick even then as he always did. For he had composed two sheets, 
one supporting the consubstantial, the other against it. The latter was written in his own hand, the first by 
someone else. Having, therefore, sworn that he held the faith, he persuaded the emperor to order that he be 
received into the Catholic Church. When he heard of this, the divine Alexander lamented before God in the 
church called Eirene. But swifter than a word, divine justice overtook Arius,  cutting him off from this life and 
the life to come in a place suited to the filth that flowed from his tongue, after he had gushed out  his bowels 
in the latrines at the very hour when he was about to go up unworthily  into  the  sacred  precincts.
These events took place in the 31st year of Constantine the Great while the divine Alexander was bishop of 
Constantinople, and it was not, as Eusebios alone states, while Eusebios of Nicomedia was hold­ ing the throne 
of Constantinople that he plotted against Athanasios at the consecration. That this is false is shown from the 
total period of time, since Constantine ruled in all for 32 years. After his first decade, in his 13th year he 
arrived in Byzantium and found Alexander's predecessor Metrophanes was bishop, after whom Alexander was 
bishop for 23 years. The period from the beginning of
33	Constantine the Great's rule to the death of Alexander was consequently 37 years, which Constantine did 
not attain. Thus from the total period of time it can be shown that Eusebios did not rule the throne of 
Constantinople in Constantine's time. This also follows from what has been said above about Arius and 
Athanasios. For Athanasios' banishment and Arius' death occurred after Constantine's 30th year and after the 
consecration at Jerusalem. The great Alexander was still alive at that time.
 



































53
 

 (AM 5828, AD 335/6]
Constantine, 32nd year Sabores, 34th year Julius, 6th year Alexander, 17th year Maximus, 2nd year 
Athanasios, 7th year
Euphronios, 25th bishop of Antioch (8 years), 1st year
In this year there flourished Eustathios, a presbyter in Constantinople, who had devoted himself to an apostolic 
life and had reached the summit of virtue; as also the builder Zenobios, who erected the Martyrium in 
Jerusalem at Constantine's instruction.
In the same year many of the Assyrians in Persia were being sold in Mesopotamia by the Saracens, and the 
Persians declared war on the Romans. The pious Constantine went out to the city of Nicomedia on his way to 
fight the Persians, but became ill and died in peace. Some Arians claim that he was then deemed worthy of 
holy baptism at the hands of Eusebios of Nicomedia, who had been transferred to Constantinople. This is false, 
as has been pointed out; for he was baptized by Silvester in Rome, as we have already demonstrated. He lived 
in all 65 years and was emperor for 3 years and IO months. He wrote a will in which he left the Empire to his 
three sons, Constantine, Constans, and Constantius, having carried out his office with piety and mercy. 
Becoming by God's providence the first emperor of the Christians, he gained power over many barbarians 
from Britain to Persia and over usurpers of his own race, destroying his enemies by the sign of the life giving 
Cross. He entrusted his will to a certain Arian presbyter who had been introduced with evil intent by his sister 
Constantia, enjoining on him to hand it to none other than Constantius, the emperor of the East. He also 
ordered Athanasios to return from exile.
Constantius, after arriving from the East, buried his father in [the
34	church of] the Apostles. The unholy Arian presbyter, after handing over the will to Constantius, enjoyed 
great influence in the palace



54
 
and even persuaded the empress herself to become an Arian. His accomplices in this were the chief eunuch 
Eusebios, Eusebios of Nicomedia, and other Arians of their persuasion.


 
Year of the divine Incarnation 329
Constantius, emperor of the Romans (24 years), 1st year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 35th year 
Julius, bishop of Rome (15 years), 7th year
Alexander, bishop of Constantinople  (23 years), 18th year Maximus, bishop of Jerusalem (6 years), 3rd year 
Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria  (46 years), 8th year Euphronios, bishop of Antioch  (8 years), 2nd year

















5 5
 



In this year, following the death of the great and holy Constantine, his three sons became rulers of the Romans: 
Constantius of the East, Constans of the Gauls, and Constantine of Italy. Constantius recalled Athanasios from 
banishment and sent him to Alexandria with a letter of commendation. The Alexandrians received him with 
great joy, especially the clergy.
Eusebios Pamphilou in his first book against Marcellus and also in his third, vehemently attacks those who 
dared call the son of God a creature. Sokrates defends Eusebios by citing quotations [from his work] in an 
attempt to show that he was not an Arian sympathizer. The truth shows him as being without a fixed view and 
varying his position according to different circumstances. Eusebios died soon after Constantine the Great, 
leaving his pupil Akakios as successor to his throne at Caesarea. Akakios was a distinguished man, and the 
author of the Medley, but was closely associated with the Arians and clearly of one mind with his teacher.
In the same year, Sabores, the Persian emperor, invaded Mesopotamia, planning to destroy Nisibis, and 
besieged it for 63
35	days. But lacking the strength to capture it, he then withdrew. Jacob, bishop of Nisibis, remaining true to 
the proper worship of God, by his prayers easily achieved his purpose. For when it seemed likely that the 
Persians would destroy Nisibis, it was he who cheated them of their expectation. For they immediately 
retreated from the city pursued by the breath of his prayer, and arriving in their own country they suffered in 
turn from hunger and plague as the wages of the sin they had committed.
The Caesar Dalmatius was killed by the troops immediately after the death of Constantine the Great. 
Constantius did not order his murder nor yet did he prevent it.



5 6
 





(AM 5830, AD 337/8)
Constantius, 2nd year Sabores, 36th year Julius, 8th year Alexander,   9th year Maximus, 4th year Athanasios, 
9th year Euphronios, 3rd year



















          57
 



In the same year when young Dalmatius had been murdered by the troops, the same fate was about to befall 
Gallus and Julian, the sons of Constantius, the brother of Constantine the Great. Ill health saved Gallus, his 
infancy Julian, for he was 8 years old.
Constantius, who had at first accepted the consubstantial, later changed his view, being of frivolous mind and 
deceived by the Arian presbyter and by Eusebios, the chief of the eunuchs, and by Eusebios of Nicomedia and 
their followers.

 

 
Year of the divine Incarnation 331
Constantius, emperor of the Romans  (24 years), 3rd year
Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 37th year 
Julius, bishop of Rome (15 years), 9th year
Alexander, bishop of Constantinople  (23 years), 20th year
Maximus, bishop of Jerusalem (6 years), 5th year 
Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria  (46 years), 10th year
Euphronios, bishop of Antioch (8 years), 4th year
In this year Constantine, the son of Constantine the Great, after invading the territories of his brother Constans 
and meeting him in battle, was killed by the troops. Constans was now sole ruler of the western lands. 
Constantius, ruler of the East, sent Gallus and
36	Julian to be brought up at a place called Demakelle near Caesarea in Cappadocia. The two brothers 
became lectors and were eager to build a church to the holy martyr Mamas. But the earth would not support the 
part which Julian happened to be building. So he cut off his hair and pretended [to undertake] monastic 
training.
Constantius and Constans made a law that a Jew could not buy a slave, and that any such was to be confiscated 
by the public treasury. And if [a Jew] should dare to circumcise a slave, he was to be punished by the sword 
and have his property confiscated.


58
 


 

Constantius,  4th year Sabores, 38th year Julius, 10th year Alexander, 21st year Maximus, 6th year 
Athanasios,	1th year Euphronios, 5th year
In this year Constantius built Amida and fortified it strongly. He also founded Constantia, naming it after 
himself. It was previously known as Antonioupolis and is 700 stades south of Amida.


 

Constantius, 5th year Sabores, 39th year Julius, 11th year













59
 



Alexander, 22nd year
Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem (15 years), 1st year Athanasios, 12th year
Euphronios, 6th year
In this year at a synod held in Antioch, [attended by] one hundred and ninety bishops under the presidency of 
Eusebios of Nicomedia, Eusebios of Emesa was elected bishop of Alexandria. When he was not accepted, 
although he was a Sabellian, they dispatched the Arian Gregory with a large force and a certain general 
Syrianos to expel Athanasios from the throne of Alexandria or to kill him. Thereupon Athanasios, after wisely 
taking advice from God, went out of the church together with the choristers and escaped his threatened death. 
Since Eusebios was not accepted by the Alexandrians they themselves altered the creed, openly accepting 
Arius, even after his death.4 They published a second statement of faith but remained silent about the 
consubstantial. Then they held the consecration of the church of Antioch which Constantine the Great had 
built.
In the same year Antioch was shaken by severe earthquakes for three days. The church that was consecrated 
was in the shape of a sphere and had taken six years to build. Constantine the Great had laid its foundations, 
while Constantius completed and consecrated it.











60
 




                                                                                             37
Year of the divine Incarnation 334
Constantius, emperor of the Romans (24 years), 6th year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 40th year 
Julius, bishop of Rome (15 years), 12th year
Alexander, bishop of Constantinople  (23 years), 23rd year Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem (15 years), 2nd year 
Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria  (46 years), 13th year Euphronios, bishop of Antioch (8 years), 7th year
In this year Constantius celebrated a triumph for his victory over the Assyrians. The Persian emperor Sabores 
persecuted the Christians subject to him in addition to his other crimes. Constans destroyed the Franks in the 
West. During a severe earthquake in Cyprus, the greater part of the city of Salamis fell.

 

Constantius, 7th year Sabores, 41st year Julius, 13th year
Paul the Confessor, bishop of Constantinople (3 years), 1st year 
Cyril, 3rd year
 

 

Athanasios, 14th year Euphronios, 8th year
In this year, during a severe earthquake, Neocaesarea in Pontos was destroyed except the church, the bishop's 
palace, and the pious men who were there. The Romans made war on the Persians and killed many of them.
In the same year Paul the Confessor was ordained bishop of Constantinople.


 

Constantius, 8th year Sabores 42nd year Julius, 14th year
Paul, 2nd year
Cyril, 4th year Athanasios, 15th year
Phlakitos, 26th bishop of Antioch (12 years), 1st year
In this year the island of Rhodes collapsed during a severe earthquake. The Alexandrians killed Gregory, who 
had attacked Athanasios like a bandit and seized the throne of Alexandria for six years. The Arian George was 
ordained by the Arians, a Cappadocian monster.



 
 


(AM 5837, AD 344/5)
Constantius, 9th year Sabores, 43rd year Julius, 15th year
Paul, 3rd year Cyril, 5th year
Athanasios, 16th year 
Phlakitos, 2nd year
In this year Dyrrachium in Dalmatia was destroyed by an earthquake and Rome suffered tremors for three 
days. Twelve cities in Campania were destroyed. Constantius, on reaching Byzantium expelled Paul the bishop 
of Constantinople from his throne and installed in his place, illegally and like a robber, the most impious
	38 Eusebios of Nicomedia,  the receptacle  of iniquity.

(AM 5838, AD 345/6)
Constantius, 10th year Sabores, 44th year
Liberius, bishop of Rome (6 years), 1st year 
Eusebios of Nicomedia, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 1st year Cyril, 6th year
Athanasios, 17th year Phlakitos, 3rd year
In this year Constantius built the harbour at Seleukeia in Syria by cutting deep into a mountain, and rebuilt the 
city. He also founded a city in Phoenicia, which he named Constantia.  It had previously been known as 
Antarados. Sabores, the Persian emperor, invaded Mesopotamia and besieged Nisibis for 78 days, but once 
again retreated in shame.
 



In the same year, there occurred an eclipse of the sun on the 6th of the month Daisios so that the stars were 
visible in the sky at the third hour of the day.
Athanasios and Paul and all the others who had been expelled for the sake of their correct belief sought refuge 
with Julius in Rome, where each explained his personal circumstances to Julius. He restored each to his own 
church with letters [of appointment.] 
 

AM 5839 (AD 346/7)
Year of the divine Incarnation 339
Constantius, emperor of the Romans (24 years), 11th year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 45th 
year Liberius, bishop of Rome (6 years), 2nd year
Eusebios, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 2nd year Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem (15 years), 7th year 
Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria (46 years), 18th year Phlakitos, 26th bishop of Antioch (12 years), 4th year
In this year Athanasios and Paul and their companions, relying on the letters of Julius, the Pope at Rome, 
returned to their own sees. But when Constantius, who was residing in Antioch, learned that Julius had restored 
Paul and Athanasios to their thrones by means of his letters, he angrily ordered their expulsion from their 
thrones.
39		In the same year the sun again became darker at the second hour on a Sunday.
 

 


64 


(AM 5840, AD 347/8)
Constantius, 12th year Sabores, 46th year Liberius, 3rd year Eusebios, 3rd year Cyril, 8th year Athanasios, 
19th year Phlakitos, 5th year
In this year most of the city of Berytos in Phoenicia collapsed during a severe earthquake. As a result, many 
pagans entered the Church professing to be Christians just like us. Thereupon some of them introduced an 
innovation and went forth after robbing, as it were, the Church of her usages. They appointed a place of prayer 
and received the throng into it, imitating all the customs of the Church and becoming very close to us (just as 
the heresy of the Samaritans [is close] to the Jews), while still living in the pagan fashion.

 

Constantius, 13th year Sabores, 47th year Liberius, 4th year Eusebios, 4th year Cyril, 9th year Athanasios, 20th 
year Phlakitos, 6th year
In this year Sabores, the emperor of Persia, once again besieged Nisibis and troubled it considerably, since he 
had brought a
 



number of elephants capable of fighting on his side and mercenary princes and all kinds of war engines by 
which he threatened to destroy the city to its foundations unless they agreed  to  depart. When the people of 
Nisibis refused to surrender, he determined that he would next flood the city by [redirecting] the river that is 
next to it. But the men overcame the enemy by their prayers having God's good will on their side. For as the 
waters were about to bring down the walls and flatten them to the ground, one part of the wall gave way, 
indeed by God's dispensation, as will be made clear in what follows. For it came about straight away that the 
city was saved and the enemy were swimming in the waters and many [of them] were destroyed by the water. 
Even after this setback, the enemy threatened to come in through the collapsed section of the wall, having 
brought up armed elephants and having made their troops ready to pursue the war more vehemently with all 
kinds of engines. But the soldiers guarding the city then gained the victory through divine providence by filling 
the place with all manner of weapons and by using catapults to kill most of the elephants. Some fell in the mud 
of the ditches. Others, after being struck, were forced back and over
40  ten thousand of their troops died. A thunderbolt from heaven struck the rest and the din of thunder, of 
gloomy clouds, and violent rain brought panic to all so that the majority died of fright. Assailed on all sides, 
the new Pharaoh, Sabores, was overcome by the waves of fear. Directing his gaze at the collapsed section of 
wall, he saw an angel in brilliant apparel standing on the top, holding the emperor Constantius by the hand. 
Terrified by this, he threatened the magi with instant death. When they had learned the reason, they admit­ ted 
in their interpretation to the emperor that the vision had greater power than they had. Having, therefore, 
recognized the cause of the danger and being filled with fear, he ordered that the war engines be burned and 
that the remaining equipment which had been prepared for the war be destroyed. He himself with his entourage 
made for his country in flight, but they perished first from a pestilential disease.


 


[AM 5842, AD 349/50)
Constantius, 14th year Sabores, 48th year Liberius, 5th year Eusebios, 5th year Cyril, 10th year Athanasios, 
21st year Phlakitos, 7th year
In this year Constantius, ruling as sole Augustus, proclaimed that his own cousin Gallus was to have a share in 
his empire as Caesar. After bestowing on him the surname Constantius, he dispatched him to Antioch in the 
East while the Persians were still attacking. 

 

Constantius, 15th year Sabores, 49th year Liberius, 6th year Eusebios, 6th year Cyril, 11th year Athanasios, 
22nd year Phlakitos, 8th year
In this year there was an uprising of the Jews in Palestine. They killed a great many aliens, both pagans and 
Samaritans. Then their whole race was destroyed by the Roman army, and their city, Diocaesarea, was wiped 
out.
In the same year Constantius, becoming angry with Liberius, who had written to him in defence of the 
consubstantial and about the holy Athanasios, sent orders that he be banished to Beroia in Thrace, at the 
instigation of the chief eunuch Eusebios, an Arian supporter. They ordained in his place Felix, a deacon of the 
same church, who had accepted the Synod of Nicaea, but foolishly was in
 



communion with the Arians. The people of Rome would not suffer to be in communion with him, so they 
established a separate congregation
41   of their own. At Constantius' command a synod was held in Milan, attended by 300 western bishops but 
very few eastern ones. It disbanded with nothing accomplished as the westerners again would not accept the 
charges against the holy Athanasios. At the request of the Romans the emperor was forced to recall Liberius 
and to restore him to his throne. Felix departed from Rome, never to return.


 

Constantius, 16th year Sabores, 50th year
Felix, 35th bishop of Rome (1 year), 1st year 
Eusebios, 7th year Cyril, 12th year Athanasios, 23rd year Phlakitos, 9th year


 

Constantius, 17th year Sabores, 51st year
Damasus, 36th bishop of Rome (28 years), 1st year 
Eusebios, 8th year Cyril, 13th year Athanasios, 24th year Phlakitos, 10th year







68
 

 

Constantius, 18th year Sabores, 52nd year Damasus, 2nd year Eusebios, 9th year Cyril, 14th year Athanasios, 
25th year Phlakitos, 11th year
In this year Gallus, also known as Constantius, who as Caesar had met with success at war, was not content 
with his good fortune and plotted a usurpation. He killed Domitian, the prefect of the East, and the quaestor 
Magnus, both of whom had revealed his plot to Constantius. Constantius recalled Gallus and ordered his 
execution on the island of Thalmon and also had his brother Julian put under arrest. But Eusebia, the wife of 
Constantius, made a plea on his behalf  and sent him to Athens.



AM 5 847 (AD 354/5)
Constantius, emperor of the Romans (24 years), 19th year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 53rd 
year Damasus, bishop of Rome (28 years), 3rd year
Eusebios, bishop of Constantinople (12 years) 10th year Hilarius, bishop of Jerusalem (12 years) 1st year 
Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria (46 years) 26th year Phlakitos, bishop of Antioch (12 years), 12th year
In this year Akakios of Caesarea and Patrophilos of Skythopolis, being Arians, deposed Maximus of Jerusalem 
and replaced him with Cyril whom they believed to be of their persuasion. 
At this time, while Cyril was bishop of Jerusalem, the sign of the life giving Cross appeared in the sky on the 
day of Pentecost. It was luminous and stretched from Golgotha, where Christ was crucified, to the Mount of 
Olives, where He was taken up. All round the sign that appeared was a crown like the rainbow. And on the 
same day it was seen by Constantius. Concerning this [event] there exists a					
		  	   42 
letter from Cyril to Constantius in which he refers to the emperor
69
 



as most pious. For this reason some people accuse Cyril of Arianism, alleging also that he had omitted the term 
'consubstantial' in his catechisms which he gave for the benefit of the uninitiated masses who had come 
forward to receive holy baptism because of the miracle of the life giving Cross. They are, however, deceived 
and in error. For it was essential to refer to the emperor in a spirit of compromise as 'most pious' inasmuch as 
he had been beguiled into heresy by the evil work of the Arians, through his own simplicity and not by his 
intent, and considering also that paganism had not yet been finally overthrown. [It was also essential] not to 
utter the term 'consubstantial' which was as yet confusing many persons and, because of the opposition of its 
enemies, discouraging those who sought baptism, but instead to make clear the meaning of the consubstantial 
through equivalent words. This is what the blessed Cyril had done by unfolding the Nicene Creed word for 
word and preaching that the Son was truly God from a truly divine Father.



 

Constantius, 20th year Sabores, 54th year Damasus, 4th year Eusebios, 11th year Hilarius, 2nd year 
Athanasios, 30th year
Stephen 1st Arian and 27th bishop of Antioch  (3 years), 1st year







70
 

 
Constantius, 2Ist year Sabores, 55th year Damasus, 5th year Eusebios, 12th year Hilarius, 3rd year Athanasios, 
31st year Stephen, 2nd year
In this year, after the death of the impious Eusebios who had ruled the throne of Constantinople, Athanasios 
and Paul went back again to Rome to Pope Julius and the emperor Constans, the brother of Constantius. For on 
Eusebios' death the people had restored Paul to the throne at Constantinople, whereas the Arians ordained 
Makedonios instead, so that a civil war broke out. When Constantius, who was residing in Antioch, heard of 
this, he commanded Hermogenes, who had been sent as magister militum to Thrace, to expel Paul from the 
Church as an incidental job along the way. When Hermogenes attempted to carry out the task, the people 
burned down his house, killed him, and threw his body into the sea.4 And so when news of this reached the 
emperor at Antioch, he proceeded to the capital, and, after expelling Paul from the throne, delayed for a while 
the enthronement of Makedonios. And because of his anger over the murder of Hermogenes, he fined the city 
40,000 daily loaves of bread out of the 80,000 that it had been given by his father. It was then that Paul, as has 
been said, went to Julius of Rome and returned to Constantinople with a letter from him. Constantius was 
again in Antioch, but at the news that Julius had			 43
restored Paul to his throne, he angrily ordered the prefect Philip to drive Paul out and in his place establish 
Makedonios on the throne. The prefect, in fear over what had happened to Hermogenes because of Paul, 
summoned Paul to the baths of Zeuxippos, let him out through a window and exiled him to Thessalonica, of 
which he was a native. Then, taking Makedonios up in his own carriage and acting like a brigand, he 
established him as a tyrant over the Church, while the orthodox put up so much opposition that 3,150 men 
were killed. It was in this manner that the Arians gained control of the Church. Then Constantius threatened 
Athanasios with death and he, in fear, fled to Rome once more, as did also Paul from Thessalonica. They both 
approached Constans and gave an account of their situation. Constans, grieving over these holy men, wrote7 in 
sorrow to his brother Constantius that he should give Paul and Athanasios back their thrones; otherwise he 
threatened to declare
71
 



war on him. He also urged him to hold a synod at Serdica, which was attended by 300 western bishops and 36 
eastern ones. The latter opposed the westerners by requesting that Athanasios and Paul be expelled first. But 
Hosios, bishop of Cordova, and Protogenes of Serdica would not accept that the holy men Athanasios and Paul 
should not be present. Thereupon the easterners gathered at Philippoupolis and shamelessly anathematized the 
consubstantial. The orthodox at Serdica ratified the correct definition of the Nicene creed and anathematized 
the 'unlikeness'. They restored Athanasios and Paul to their thrones and also Marcellus of Ancyra, who 
confessed the consubstantial and defended his position by saying that his accusers had misinterpreted his 
writings. After the synod of Serdica had taken such measures against the dissident easterners and had ratified 
the consubstantial, Constantius pretended to receive Athanasios and Paul with honour and gave them back their 
thrones. So Athanasios came to Alexandria and, after driving out the Arian George, was received with great 
rejoicing. When the Augustus  Constantius,  who  was  residing  at  Antioch,  heard  that
44			Magnentius had usurped power in Gaul and murdered the pious
Constans he immediately sent instructions that Paul be exiled from the city to Koukousos, where he was killed 
by Arians. Thereupon
Makedonios took over the throne. Constantius set out for Italy against Magnentius. The Roman Senate 
invested Nepotianus with authority and sent him against Magnentius, with whom he clashed in Rome, but was 
killed by him after three months as emperor. Before the emperor reached Rome, Constantia, also known as 
Helena (Constantius' sister), proclaimed Bretanion as emperor, a man of high rank, and sent him to do battle 
with Magnentius. When Constantius reached Rome he received Bretanion with great honour and they both 
fought Magnentius near Mursa. Magnentius was defeated and fled to Italy. After many encounters with 
Constantius' generals, Magnentius clashed with them on Mount Seleukos, was defeated and fled to Lugdunum. 
After first killing his brother and his mother, he later committed suicide. His brother, the Caesar Dicentius, 
hanged himself. Next Silvanus, who had usurped power in Gaul, was killed by Constantius' generals.
After reaching Rome, Constantius made his entry with much pomp and ostentation and was given titles 
exceeding those of the emperors before him. He was accompanied by his wife Eusebia and he stayed in Rome 
for fourteen days. During his stay in Rome he went to the Campus Tribunalis and, standing on a height in the 
presence of the army and of Bretanion, he addressed the host, arguing



72
 

that a [necessary] consequence of imperial government was that authority should remain in the hands of the 
one who had inherited it from his imperial ancestors, and that it was of benefit to the commonwealth that 
public affairs be managed by a single authority, and so forth. He then stripped Bretanion (who had ruled for 10 
months) of his power but at the same time shared his table with him at a banquet,				
			    45
and then sent him to Prousa in Bithynia bestowing on him full honours,  a  bodyguard,  and  many  favours.  
Being a Christian, Bretanion frequented the church and gave many alms to the poor. He also honoured the 
priests until his last day.
Constantius returned to Byzantium and, at the request of his wife Eusebia, released Gallus' brother Julian from 
prison, promoted him to Caesar and, after uniting him in marriage to his own sister Helena (also known as 
Constantia), sent him to Gaul.
In the same year Julius the pope died in Rome and Liberius was elected in his place. He was an admirable man 
in every respect, and orthodox. The Arians so moved the emperor against Athanasios that he was condemned 
on a capital charge. But the holy man fled once again and gained safety.













73
 



AM 5850 (AD 357/8]
Year of the divine Incarnation 350
Constantius, emperor of the Romans (24 years), 22nd year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 56th 
year Damasus, bishop of Rome (28 years), 6th year Makedonios, bishop of Constantinople (1 year), 1st year 
Hilarius, bishop of Jerusalem (12 years), 4th year





















74
 



Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria  (46 years), 32nd year Stephen, bishop of Antioch ( 3 years), 3rd year

In this year the city of Nicomedia was thrown down by a sever earthquake at a bout the third hour at night, and 
a great many people lost their lives. Among those who perished was the citys bishop Kekropios.

 

Constantius, 23rd year Sabores, 57th year Damasus, 7th year Makedonios, 2nd year Hilarius, 5th year 
Athanasios, 33rd year
Leontios, bishop of Antioch  (8 years),  1st year

[AM 5852, AD 359/60)
Constantius, 24th year Sabores, 5 8th year Damasus, 8th year
Eudoxios, bishop of Constantinople after Makedonios' expulsion, 1st year
Hilarius, 6th year Athanasios, 34th year Leontios, 2nd year
Still holding the throne of Constantinople like a usurper,	46 Makedonios transferred the body of 
Constantine the Great to St Akakios from the Holy Apostles, pleading the [imminent] collapse of that church. 
But when the people opposed him, there was considerable loss of life, with the result that the well and 
courtyard of the martyrium and the adjacent streets were filled with blood. When Constantius learned of this he 
became annoyed with Makedonios, ordered his deposition, and installed Eudoxios in his place, exchanging a 
great evil for a greater one.
In this year the Persians captured the fort named Bedzabde.  On hearing that Julian, who had won success in 
his campaigns in Gaul,
75
 



had been proclaimed emperor by the army, Constantius, who was residing in Antioch because of the Persian 
War, marched out against the usurper Julian. When he had reached Mampsoukrenai,  the first stopping point 
after Tarsos in Cilicia, he died on the 3rd of the month of Dios, having repented greatly of his folly. He had 
been baptized at that time in Antioch by the Arian Euzoios in the 5,852nd universal year of the world, at the 
end of the 11th period of 532 years and the beginning of the 12th. Then indeed Julian, as sole emperor, showed 
his paganism shamelessly, washing  away his holy baptism with the blood of sacrifice and doing  everything  
by which demons are served.


 

Year of the divine Incarnation 353
Julian, emperor of the Romans (3 years), 1st year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 59th year 
Damasus, bishop of Rome (28 years), 9th year
Eudoxios, bishop of Constantinople (10 years), 2nd year Hilarius, bishop of Jerusalem  (14 years), 7th year 
Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria  (46 years), 35th year Leontios, bishop of Antioch (8 years), 3rd year
In this year Julian the transgressor became emperor and sole ruler because of the mass of our sins. For, puffed 
up by his victory over the barbarians, after taking power for himself and donning the diadem









76
 



before Constantius' death, he turned shamelessly to                       47 paganism. That was why 
Constantius, extremely penitent at the news of the murder of his kinsmen, the new departure from the faith, 
and the proclamation of the apostate, gave up his soul. So when Julian the Apostate had gained sole power by 
divine judgement, manifold visitations of divine wrath invaded the Roman world. Wishing to show that 
Constantius had been unjust and inhumane, this lawless man, feigning righteousness, recalled the exiled 
bishops and executed Eusebios, chief of the palace eunuchs, for supposed injustice. He also drove the other 
eunuchs from the palace since he had dissolved the marriage by which Constantius had linked him to his sister. 
Similarly he expelled the cooks, because of his frugal ways, and the barbers, since one was sufficient for many, 
as he used to say. From the public post he removed the camels and asses, the oxen and mules, and only allowed 
horses to serve, because of the great avarice to which he was a slave, even to the point of idolatry. It was then 
that the pagans in the East, being straight away puffed up, killed the bishop George of Alexandria by dragging 
him and insulted his corpse in a godless way by placing it on a camel and parading it through the city and, after 
mixing his remains with the bones of dead animals, burned and scattered them. Then Athanasios, who had 
been hiding for a long time with a certain virgin, came out and convened a synod in Alexandria; he ratified the 
doctrines of Nicaea and received back the churches. The Arians, for their part, elected Lucius for themselves to 
replace George and would assemble in an ordinary house. The pagans crucified and murdered many other 
Christians. Having dug up the relics of St Patrophilos, bishop of Skythopolis, they insolently hung up his skull 
and mocked it and scattered the rest of them. In Gaza and Askalon they killed the presbyters and ever virgins, 
cut open their innards, filled them with barleycorn and tossed them to the pigs. In Phoenicia the Helioupolitans 
killed the deacon Cyril and ate a piece of his liver, because he had	48 overturned their idols in the times of the 
blessed Constantine. The man who had cut up the deacon and tasted his liver suffered as follows. After his 
tongue had rotted he vomited it up and lost his teeth and his sight failed and, tortured like this, he died. To the 
Christians of Caesarea in Cappadocia Julian did much harm, even depriving the city of its status and of its 
name of Caesarea, ordering that it be called Mazaka as it had been in earlier times, because the Christians there 
in the time of Constantius had done much harm to the pagans and pulled down the temple of Tyche. In 
Arethousa he did terrible things to the Christians, in particular to the most holy monk Mark, who had saved 
Julian by hiding him when the army
77
 


was killing the kinsmen of Constantius' family. His innards while he was still alive. In Emesa, he set up a 
statue of Dionysos in the cathedral church and pulled down the old church. Maris of Chalcedon hurled much 
abuse at Julian to his face while he was about to sacrifice at the temple of Tyche, but being a philosopher (as he 
pretended) he put up with the insults.

 

Julian, 2nd year Sabores, 60th year Damasus, 10th year Eudoxios, 3rd year Hilarius, 8th year Athanasios, 36th 
year Leontios, 4th year
In this year the impious Julian introduced a law that Christians could not take part in pagan education. 
Apolinarios, using material from the Holy Scriptures, imitated the idioms of the ancients and composed a work 
against Julian which he entitled 'For Truth', which greatly benefited the Church. Julian ordered the expulsion of 
the great Athanasios from Alexandria being strongly urged against him by the pagans. As he left, Athanasios 
encouraged the Christians who were weeping on his behalf. 'Take heart,' he said, 'he is just a little cloud and 
will pass by.' Julian also wrote to the people of Bostra to expel their holy bishop Titus from the city.  
Dorotheos, the sorely tried bishop of Tyre, the eloquent author of many ecclesiastical histories, who had been a 
confessor under Diocletian and again under Licinius,  now that he had reached  a venerable  old age in the
49	second year of the transgressor, was discovered by that man's officials





78
 



living privately in Odyssopolis, and after being severely maltreated for his belief in Christ, he was killed at the 
age of 107.
  In imitation of the good works of the Christians, Julian ordered that provisions be supplied to wayfarers and 
beggars, so deceiving the simple minded. The impious man ordered that representations of Zeus, Ares, 
Hermes, and the other demons be added to his own images, and that those who refused obeisance to them were 
to be punished as enemies of the emperor. At the distribution of wages to the army, he would set out fire and 
incense and compelled the army to bum incense.
  At Caesarea Philippi, now called Paneas, from where the woman with an issue of blood came, a statue of the 
Lord used to stand in front of her house, which she had set up as a mark of thanksgiving in the pagan custom. 
The impious Julian ordered that this be pulled down. This was done, the pagans mocking as they dragged the 
statue away and in its place set up an effigy in Julian's name. The Christians took their statue and placed it in 
the church. Fire then descended from heaven and burned the effigy of the transgressor. And at the base of the 
statue [of Christ] a herb grew which was a guard against every disease, and it was this which drove the 
apostate Julian in jealousy to overturn the statue of the Lord.
  At Nikopolis in Palestine, previously called Emmaus, there is a spring which provides cures for all kinds of 
diseases for both men and beasts. For they say that the Lord our God Jesus Christ washed his feet in it after a 
journey. That man ordered it to be covered with earth. At Hermoupolis in the Thebaid a persea tree stands. 
Anyone who takes a leaf or twig of it finds a cure for every human [disease]. And they say that when the Lord 
was in this region with the Mother of God and Joseph, fleeing to Egypt from Herod, the tree bent down to the 
ground and did homage to Him and up to the present it keeps the shape of its adoration.
  Julian, who was residing in Antioch and continually went up to Daphne to honour the idol of Apollo, did not 
receive any reply from it, which he was expecting. And realizing that the relics of the holy martyr Babylas, 
which lay in Daphne, were keeping the idol silent, he sent out a decree that all the relics of the dead buried 
there,      50 including those of the martyr, were to be moved. When this happened, the temple was burned 
down completely during the night [by a fire] from heaven, and the idol was so burned up that not a trace of it 
remained (it was said to have stood for years), while the temple was so utterly destroyed that men in later times 
who saw its ashes marvelled at this miracle of God's miracle working. Julian, being amazed at this, and 
suspecting that it was the result of a plot by the
79
 



Christians, began an investigation of the priests who lived there, subjecting them to all kinds of tortures, so that 
some of them died. The only thing he learned from them was that this was not the work of Christians nor any 
human plot, but that the fire which burned the temple and the statues had descended from heaven, and that on 
that night, as the fire came down, it had appeared to some people in the countryside. And so in fury and like a 
man doing battle with God, the emperor closed the cathedral church and confiscated all the sacred utensils. 
Two comites were sent out for this purpose, Felix and Julian, both apostates, who said, 'We used to believe that 
there was some overseeing power which ought to stop us.' Felix added, 'See what kind of utensils were used 
for the service of the son of Mary.' A little later Felix suddenly began vomiting blood, and ended his life in 
torment. On the same day comes Julian was brought down with a most dire illness, so that even his bowels 
were destroyed and he vomited excrement, and he died in torment.

 

Year of the divine Incarnation 355
Julian, emperor of the Romans (3 years), 3rd year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 6 1st year 
Damasus, bishop of Rome (28 years), 11th year Eudoxios, bishop of Constantinople (10 years), 4th year 
Hilarius, bishop of Jerusalem (12 years), 9th year Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria (46 years), 37th year 
Leontios, bishop of Antioch (8 years), 5th year














80 

  In this year some soldiers under examination were tricked into apostasy, either by the promise of gifts and 
rank, or else by constraint placed on them by their own officers. Likewise Theoteknos, a presbyter to whom 
had been entrusted a church in a suburb of Antioch, was tricked from his vow, and voluntarily went over to 
idolatry.	       51 God punished him immediately. For he was eaten by worms, lost his sight, ate his 
tongue, and died. And Heron, bishop of the Thebaid, voluntarily apostatized in the city of Antioch. God 
immediately punished him as follows as an example to frighten the multitude. His limbs became weak with 
putrefaction and he lay prostrate in the street and expired before the eyes of all. There were also some who 
were conspicuous for their confession of Christ. Valentinian, at the time tribune of a tagma, in the numerus 
known as the Cornuti, not only disregarded his rank, but was driven into exile. This is the man who later was 
proclaimed emperor by God. Likewise Jovian handed in his service belt shouting 'I am a Christian'. The troops 
loved him as their commander and implored the emperor not to punish him. This is the man who was 
proclaimed emperor after Julian. Artemios, dux of the diocese of Egypt, inasmuch as he had shown great zeal 
against idols in Alexandria in the time of Constantius, had his possessions confiscated and was beheaded. 
Aemilianus, who had served as a soldier, was martyred at Dorostolon in Thrace, having been consigned to the 
flames by Capitolinus. And many others in various places and ways were conspicuous for their confession of 
Christ. A certain Thalassios, notorious for his licentiousness and profligacy, a man who had procured his own 
daughter for prostitution, was honoured by the emperor as an examiner of entrails and lived close to the palace 
in Antioch. So when his house collapsed he alone perished along with one eunuch with whom he was found 
entwined. All those who were present with him were saved, since the members of his household were 
Christians, including his wife and her companions. A child, about 7 years old, who was found there and was 
saved, when asked how, said 'I was held up by an angel.'
Julian of evil name, seeking to overturn God's decree, ordered the temple of the Jews to be built, and appointed 
a certain pagan Alypios, a zealous opponent of Christ, as overseer of the work. After he had dug out even the 
hidden parts of the foundations in the course of excavation,  a violent wind blew with a hurricane force and 52 
completely destroyed the 200,000 modii of lime that had been prepared. As the Jews were persisting in the 
undertaking, a fire shot out and consumed them, so putting an end to their effrontery.
The impious Julian wrote a refutation of the holy gospels which 
81
 

Cyril the Great of Alexandria brilliantly overturned in an outstanding treatise.
Porphyrios, the man who raged against us, a Tyrian by birth, a wretched fellow who had earlier been a 
Christian, was beaten up by the Christians of Caesarea in Palestine and in anger converted to paganism, and 
then the dog dared to write an attack on the truth. In these times the holy Cross was seen shining in the 
heavens, from Golgotha to the holy Mount of Olives, circled by a wreath of light; it was even brighter than in 
the time of Constantius.  Of its own accord the sign of the Cross appeared on altar cloths, books and church 
vestments as well as on clothes not only of Christians but also of Jews, not only in Jerusalem but in Antioch 
and other cities.
  Those Jews and pagans who impudently did not believe, found their clothes covered with crosses. On some 
they were even black.
Julian dispatched numerous emissaries to oracles that gave prophecies in different places so as to appear to be 
undertaking his war against Persia under the protection of demons. Of the numerous oracles that were brought 
to him from various places, I shall mention just one. It was as follows: All we gods have set out to bring the 
trophies of victory to the wild beast river. I am their leader, impetuous Ares, raising the din of war. Placing his 
trust in these, he armed for war against the Persians, imposing severe financial penalties on the Christians. 
When he was in Antioch on the pretext of [buying] supplies, he was strongly insulted by the Antiochenes. It 
was then that he wrote 'The Beard Hater', [a work] concerning Antioch in which he attempted to defend 
himself. He cruelly tormented a young man called Theodore for initiating the insults directed at him. After 
inflicting many great ills on the Christians and promising to inflict many more after the Persian War, he 
miserably ended his abominable
53    life during the war. For while in foreign territory, he was destroyed by divine justice. In this year, having 
ruled for two years and nine months, he was killed by God in Persia, on 26 January in the 6th indiction being 
31 years of age. In the month of Daisios, while he was in Persia, there appeared a sign. In the house of a 
Christian countrywoman a pitcher full of water was changed into wine, frothing up like must at eventide. At 
the same hour the filled vessel was brought into the church of that village. The local presbyter filled a small 
bucket from it and brought it to bishop Augaros.
In Karrhai a woman was found hanged by her hair, and in Antioch many human skulls were found by means of 
which the Apostate had carried out his divination about the Persian War. He had locked up these places with 
seals and bars.
 


 

Year of the divine Incarnation 356
Jovian, emperor of the Romans (1 year),  1st year
 

Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 62nd year Damasus, bishop of Rome (28 years), 12th year 
Eudoxios, bishop of Constantinople  (10 years), 5th year Hilarius, bishop of Jerusalem  (12 years), 10th year 
Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria  (46 years), 38th year Leontios, bishop of Antioch (8 years), 6th year
In this year the chiliarch Jovian, a most gentle man and an orthodox Christian, was acclaimed Roman emperor 
by the whole army, the generals, and the consuls in that same part of the Persian land where the Apostate had 
been killed. And after a single clash in battle peace was proclaimed, as though from God, by both Romans and 
Persians acting in unison and fixed for thirty years. Jovian declined the Empire, claiming he was unable to 
command an army that had become pagan under Julian. To which they all shouted out with one voice that they 
were Christians. Jovian handed over the great city of Nisibis to the Persians to ensure the safety of the 
remaining army and made peace. He issued general laws on behalf
54 of the churches throughout the Roman Empire, restoring the catholic Church to the status and honour 
established in the time of the blessed Constantine the Great. He recalled the exiled bishops and wrote to the 
holy Athanasios asking him to provide an accurate statement in writing of the creed which is without fault, 
which Athanasios accomplished in a letter of complete orthodoxy that he wrote to Jovian.3 As a result Jovian 
became more strongly orthodox and showered benefactions as well as a remission of taxes on those who 
espoused the consubstantial. Akakios, that extremely wicked Arian from Caesarea, after a meeting with other 
bishops at Antioch, drew up a feigned statement of orthodoxy, professing the consubstantial and the Synod of 
Nicaea, through fear of the pious emperor, and not because of God.
The emperor Jovian reached the city of the Antiochenes in the month of Hyperberetaios. A child was born to a 
country gardener outside the city gate at the place called Tripylon. It was female, the product of a seven month 
pregnancy, and had two separate heads, each completely formed, being separated at the neck. It was stillborn in 
the month Dios, that is November. Jovian set out from Antioch to Constantinople and, after reaching Ancyra in 
Galatia, he made a procession as consul with his son Varonianus, proclaiming him epiphanestatos but without 
granting him the purple. 
In the same year upon reaching Dadasthana, a village in Bithynia, the most Christian Jovian died after a rule of 
nine months and fifteen days. The army proclaimed as emperor Valentinian 


Augustus [who ruled] eleven years, because of his high repute as a Christian confessor. He immediately set out 
for Constantinople, and when he reached the Imperial City, he proclaimed his brother Valens as partner in the 
Empire, assigning him the eastern parts while he himself took the West.


 

Year of the divine Incarnation 357
Valentinian, emperor of the Romans (11 years), 1st year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years), 63rd year 
Damasus, bishop of Rome (28 years), 13th year Eudoxios, bishop of Constantinople (10 years), 6th year 
Hilarius, bishop of Jerusalem (12 years), 11th year Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria ( 46 years), 39th year 
Leontios, bishop of Antioch (8 years), 7th year
In this year the Augustus Valentinian proclaimed his son Gratian	55 Augustus, both as partner in the Empire 
and as consul, having previously proclaimed, as has been said, his brother Valens emperor, an ardent Arian who 
had been baptized by Eudoxios. The orthodox approached Valentinian through Hypatios, bishop of Herakleia, 
begging him to allow them a meeting to set aright the doctrine of the
 



consubstantial.  To them Valentinian replied,  'It is not proper for me, whose place is with the laity, to 
interfere in such matters. Therefore, conduct yourselves as seems best to you, priests. Having   then 
assembled at Lampsakos and spent two months there, they finally declared the actions of Eudoxios and 
Akakios in Constantinople invalid, and announced the validity of the creed of Seleukeia. The impious Valens 
overturned what had been done in Lampsakos and sent the bishops who had gathered there into exile. He gave 
the churches of Constantinople to Eudoxios, who was of the same mind as he was.  The orthodox now had 
neither   a shepherd nor a church.

(AM 585 8 AD 365/6)
Valentinian, 2nd year Sabores, 64th year Damasus, 14th year Eudoxios, 7th year Hilarius, 12th year 
Athanasios, 40th year Leontios, 8th year
In this year Liberius, bishop of Rome, Athanasios of Alexandria, Meletios of Antioch, and Eusebios of 
Samosata, who had been recalled from exile by Jovian, were conspicuous in the right cause and likewise Cyril 
of Jerusalem and other bishops who were champions of orthodoxy. Lucius was leader of the Arians in 
Alexandria and Euzoios in Antioch, while of the orthodox, who were divided into two groups, one was headed 
by Paulinus and the other by Meletios. 
 

[AM 5859, AD 366/7]
Valentinian, 3rd year Sabores, 65th year Damasus, 15th year Eudoxios, 8th year
Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem (35 years), 1st year Athanasios,  41st year
Eudoxios, bishop of Antioch (2 years), 1st year

In this year Prokopios led an uprising in Constantinople in the month of September. He set out for Nakoleia, 
protected by a large army, which terrified Valens, who for a while gave up his war against the churches until 
Prokopios had been betrayed by his own generals Agelon and Gomaris. Valens had Prokopios tied by his limbs 
to two trees which had been bent towards each other and then ordered that the trees be released. The force of 
the trees springing upright tore the usurper apart. Valens ordered that Agelon and Gomaris, the two generals 
who had betrayed Prokopios, be cut up with a saw, a fate 56 suffered by the poor wretches who had shown 
goodwill to a dishonourable man. At that time he also pulled down the walls of Chalcedon from his fear of 
Prokopios. Having killed Prokopios he returned to his attack on the truth. He then forced Eleusios of Kyzikos 
to agree to the Difference in Substance. This Eleusios, after he arrived in Kyzikos, announced his own 
transgression publicly and said that he was unworthy to administer the sacraments and urged that someone else 
be nominated as bishop of Kyzikos. When the evil thinking Eudoxios heard of this, he appointed Eunomios 
bishop of Kyzikos in his place.
In the same year the emperor Valens spent some time at Markianoupolis in Mysia. In indiction 8 there was a 
great earthquake by night throughout the whole world, so that in Alexandria ships moored to the shore were 
lifted high up over the top of tall buildings and walls and were carried within [the city] into courtyards and 
houses. When the water had receded, they remained on dry land. The people fled from the city because of the 
earthquake but when they saw the ships on dry land they went up to them to loot their cargoes. But the 
returning water covered them all. Other sailors related that they were sailing in the Adriatic at that hour when 
they were caught up and suddenly their ship was sitting on the seabed; 
after a short time the water returned again and so they resumed  their voyage.
 (AM 5860, AD 367/8]
Valentinian, 4th year Sabores, 66th year Damasus, 6th year Eudoxios, 9th year Cyril, 2nd year Athanasios, 
42nd year Eudoxios, 2nd year
In this year Valentinian the elder, while his wife Severa, Gratian's mother, was still living, illegally married 
Justina after Severa had testified to her beauty. The children he had by her were Valentinian the younger, whom 
the army proclaimed emperor after his father's death, and three daughters, Justa, Grata, and Galla, whom 
Theodosios the elder wed at his second marriage and by whom he had Placidia. Arkadios and Honorius were 
Theodosios' children by his first wife Placilla. Valentinian composed an illegal law that there was no bar to 
anyone who wished having two wives at the same
57   time. The impious Valens had two daughters, Anastasia and Carossa, in whose names he built two baths 
and the aqueduct which even now is known as the Valentinianic.
Some say that it was Valens' wife Domnica who persuaded  him
 


to become such a vehement Arian. Others relate that after he became emperor, when he was baptized by 
Eudoxios, he confirmed on oath at his baptism that his views were Arian and that he would not accept the 
consubstantial, and thus the unholy pair launched numberless persecutions against the orthodox. They sent the 
Armenian Eustathios, Silvanus of Tarsos, and Theophilos of Kastabala to Liberius of Rome, promising through 
them that they would accept the consubstantial. They handed to Liberius a written document in support of the 
consubstantial, stating that they shunned every heresy that was contrary to the Synod of Nicaea. Liberius 
received them, admitted them to communion, and sent a letter to those in the East testifying to their orthodoxy.
While campaigning against the Goths, Valens wintered at Markianoupolis.

 

Year of the divine Incarnation 361
Valentinian, emperor of the Romans (11 years), 5th year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (70 years 67th year 
Damasus, bishop of Rome (28 years), 17th year Eudoxios, bishop of Constantinople (10 years), 10th year 
Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem (35 years), 3rd year Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria  (46 years), 43rd year 
Anianos, bishop of Antioch (4 years),  1st year
In this year there was a synod at Tyana. Those present included Eusebios of Caesarea in Cappadocia and 
Gregory of Nazianzos, the
 



father of the Theologian, Hotreios of Melitene, and others who, rejoicing at Liberius' letter, announced to all 
orthodox bishops that they should proceed to Tarsos to confirm the true faith. When Valens heard this, he 
prevented the meeting. Eudoxios once again impelled Valens to command the regional magistrates to banish 
all the bishops who had been banished by Constantius and who had
58 been recalled by Julian and Jovian. Thereupon Athanasios voluntarily left Alexandria since the people would not 
let the governor banish him. He stayed hidden for a long time in the family tomb. Later Valens, fearing an uprising 
in Alexandria, ordered Athanasios' recall.
Eunomios seceded from communion with Eudoxios because Eudoxios was not in communion with Aëtios, 
Eunomios' teacher. For though they were both of the same persuasion, Eudoxios shunned Aëtios because he was 
universally hated, and clearly did not shun him in shame because his beliefs were sacrilegious. For Eunomios, who 
had been the godless Aëtios' secretary, had been trained in sophistic studies, as a result of which he used to boast, it 
would seem, that he was completely unacquainted with the Holy Scriptures, as his seven volumes make very clear. 
The people of Kyzikos had expelled Eunomios for being a heretic and a blasphemer and he had then come and 
united with Eudoxios. Indeed, he was extremely blasphemous, even having the effrontery to say that God knew no 
more than we do about His own essence. Worse things happened to the orthodox during the period of the impious 
Valens and Eudoxios than during the pagan persecution.
In this period, after Eudoxios' death, the Arians elected Demophilos as bishop, while the orthodox chose a certain 
Evagrios who was ordained by the holy Eustathios of Antioch who was living secretly in Constantinople after 
returning from banishment under Jovian. When he heard that Jovian was dead, he remained in hiding in the city. 
When Valens, who was staying in Markianoupolis, heard of the ordination of Evagrios, he banished the holy 
Eustathios to Bizye, expelled Evagrios from the city, and handed over the churches to the Arian Demophilos.

 



 

Valentinian, 6th year Sabores, 68th year Damasus, 18th year
Demophilos, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 1st year Cyril, 4th year
Athanasios, 44th year Anianos, 2nd year
In this year, when the impious Valens came to Nicomedia, the orthodox sent an embassy to him of eighty priestly 
men, led by Theodoros, Urbanus, and Menedemos. Valens ordered that they all be set on fire along with their ship. 
And so they were all burned, together with the ship, which held out as far as Dakidiza.


 

[Year of the divine Incarnation] 363 Valentinian, 7th year
Sabores, 69th year Damasus, 19th year Demophilos, 2nd year Cyril, 5th year Athanasios, 45th year Anianos, 3rd 
year
 



In this year the accursed Valens granted immunity to the pagans to  59 hold their sacrifices and festivals. Likewise 
he cherished and honoured the Jews, persecuting terribly the orthodox alone and the apostolic Church.


 

Valentinian, 8th year Sabores, 70th year Damasus, 20th year Demophilos, 3rd year Cyril, 6th year Athanasios, 46th 
year Anianos, 4th year
In this year Valens, after coming to Antioch in Syria gave a display of outrageous acts against the orthodox, killing 
many by the sword and drowning others in the Orontes river which flows by. Likewise, after reaching Edessa, he 
carried out even worse deeds, ordering the prefect Modestus to arrest the crowd of the orthodox who were 
assembled in the shrine of St. Thomas and slaughter them. The case of a woman, who happened to be dragging her 
child hastily to death, put, however, Valens to shame and shocked the prefect and so prevented the crime, this being 
obviously due to God's dispensation. Valens banished Eusebios of Samosata to Thrace. When the people would not 
allow this, the holy man amazed them the more by leaving the city voluntarily and going along with those who were 
expelling him. In his place the Arians elected a certain Eunomios, an ardent Arian, with whom no one at Samosata 
had communion. When he was bathing and encouraging the populace to bathe with him, they refused to bathe unless 
they first emptied the water from the pool which Eunomios had entered and filled it with new water, since they said 
that the original water had been defiled by Eunomios. When he learned this he fled from the city, implacably hated. 
After he had left, the Arians appointed a certain Lucius, who was truly lupine.  Likewise Valens was eager to hand 
the churches in Cappadocia over to the Arians, having come to grips with the opposition
92
 

he had faced from Basil the Great who was then presbyter of the church of Caesarea and was arousing bishop 
Eusebios to defend orthodoxy and not to yield to the impiety of Valens.

(AM 5865, AD 372/3)
Valentinian, 9th year
Artaxer, emperor of the Persians (4 years), 1st year 
Damasus, 21st year Demophilos, 4th year Cyril, 7th year
Peter, bishop of Alexandria (1 year), 1st year
Meletios, again, 31st bishop of Antioch  (25 years), 1st year
In this year, while Valens was in Antioch, some people were found to be preparing a plot against him and a crowd of 
impious people were put to death. For they were carrying out their plot by means of divination and sacrifices.              
60
The much enduring and hard toiling Athanasios departed to the Lord, having been bishop for forty-six years, forty of 
them under persecution and in peril on behalf of piety. Peter succeeded him as bishop, but the Arians drove him out 
through a certain Magnus, steward of the imperial treasures, and appointed Lucius in his place. Then many orthodox 
men, women, and virgins were maltreated in an ungodly way and many died under torture. Peter fled to Damasus in 
Rome as to one who shared his views. At that time he wrote in a letter about the frightful acts of the Arians in 
Alexandria.
In the same year also Basil became bishop of Caesarea after the death of the pious Eusebios.
 
AM 5866 (AD 373/4]
Year of the divine Incarnation 366 			  Valentinian, emperor of the Romans (11 years), 10th year 
Artaxer, emperor of the Persians (4 years), 1st year  	        Damasus, bishop of Rome (28 years), 22nd year         
Demophilos, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 4th year  Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem (35 years), 8th year	         
Lucius, bishop of Alexandria  (6 years), 1st year 	      Meletios, bishop of Antioch (25 years), 2nd year
In this year Ambrose became leader of the church of Milan in succession to Auxentios in the following manner. As 
the people rioted over the appointment of a bishop, Ambrose, who was governor of the region, was sent by the 
emperor Valentinian, who was residing there, to put an end to the disturbance. Ambrose was still not baptized but 
showed great concern for justice, and bravely reprimanded the more important officials who were doing wrong. And 
so the people, after ending their strife, voted unanimously for Ambrose to be bishop. When Valentinian heard this, he 
ordered that Ambrose be baptized and ordained bishop, giving thanks to God in the sight of all and saying, 'Thanks 
be to Thee, all powerful Lord, our Saviour, that Thou hast entrusted the souls of men to this man whom I had 
appointed as ruler of their bodies, and that Thou hast vindicated my decrees.
Lucius along with the Arians did much wrong in Alexandria. For they used to sing the songs of demons in the 
church of 
61	Theonas and brought in dancers, and taking off the virgins' clothing and snorting angrily through the nose, 
took them round the city naked, treating them lewdly. Some of the virgins they killed and did not even give the 
bodies for burial to the sadly grieving parents. They even brought in a lewd youth to perform obscenities within the 
altar precincts. 
		With the whole of the West supporting the consubstantiality of the Trinity, they made a request to 
Valentinian to hold a synod in Illyricum where they confirmed the faith of Nicaea. Valentinian wrote an edict to the 
bishops of Asia, Phrygia, and all the East exhorting them to observe the definitions made at the synod, and including 
his brother Valens and his son Gratian as partners in the edict. Then Gregory the Theologian became leader of the 
church at Constantinople at the instigation of Basil and Meletios and the other champions of piety. And if he had not 
recalled the city from error just in time, it would have been entirely filled with the taint of Arius and Eunomios, for 
they had gained control of all the churches
 





apart from the chapel of the martyr Anastasia.  Demophilos was bishop of the Arians.
At that time Gregory of Nyssa and Peter, the brothers of Basil, were eminent, as were Optimus in Pisidia and 
Amphilochios in Ikonion. Valens banished Barses, bishop of Edessa, and Pelagios of Laodikeia for being champions 
of orthodoxy. Valentinian reproached his brother Valens for his false beliefs, and did not send him the sup­ port he 
requested against the Goths, but said, 'It is not right to come to the aid of one who fights against God.

 (AM 5867, AD 374/5)
Valentinian, 11nth year Artaxer, 2nd year Damasus, 23rd year Demophilos, 5th year Cyril, 9th year
Lucius, 2nd year Meletios, 3rd year
In this year Valentinian the elder, having been emperor for eleven years, died at the age of 84, in the following 
manner. The Sauromatai, a small and pitiable tribe, after revolting against him and being defeated, sent envoys to 
him to seek peace. When Valentinian asked the envoys whether all Sauromatai had such a pitiable physique as they 
did, they replied that 'The strongest of us
 



all are the ones you see before you.' He then shouted out violently, 'The Roman Empire is in terrible trouble now it 
has ended up with Valentinian if Sauromatai such as these are revolting against the
62	Romans.' From the extension of his arms and from the clapping of his hands he burst a vein and lost a great 
deal of blood and so died in some fort in Gaul on the 17th of the month Dias in the 3rd indiction. Since his son 
Gratian was not there and Valens was residing in Antioch, the army that happened to be at the place where 
Valentinian the elder died proclaimed his 4 year old son Valentinian Augustus, his mother Justina being also present 
in Pannonia. When Gratian heard this, he accepted his brother as joint emperor with him, but punished those who 
had proclaimed him in various ways since this had taken place without his consent
Valens sent the general Trajan against the Goths. He was defeated and returned in dishonour. Rebuked by Valens for 
cowardice, he replied, 'It is not I who am defeated, Emperor, but you who campaign against God and have secured 
His divine aid for the barbarians.' Valens put to death many people whose name began with the letter 'theta', whom 
as a result of divination he suspected of being destined to reign. Among these was a certain Theodore, first among 
the patricians.
In the same period some of the Novatians in Phrygia, who had gathered at a village called Pazos, began to celebrate 
Easter with the Jews and they published a law that they would have Easter with the Jews. It is from them that the 
Sabbatians, named after a certain Sabbatios, later developed. It was then also that the Syrian Apolinarios openly 
separated from the Church. Damasus of Rome and Peter of Alexandria were the first to condemn them. The impious 
Eunomios dared to carry out baptism in a single immersion, saying 'One ought to be baptized not in the Trinity but 
in the death of Christ'; and he would re-baptize those who had been baptized in the Trinity. Julian, surnamed Sabas, a 
holy ascetic, after coming to Antioch from Edessa sustained the orthodox, who paid honour to the consubstantial, by 
openly anathematizing the Arians. In Antioch the holy Aphraates with great boldness charged Valens with impiety to 
his face. One of the eunuchs, who had come down to get the emperor's bath ready, after insolently abusing and 
threatening Aphraates, went out of his mind, threw himself into the hot water and perished. The great Ephraim, 
outstanding for his asceticism and holy teaching,
63	poured forth through the Holy Ghost many ascetic tracts, and even more doctrinal ones. He gave some of his 
works to be sung by the Syrians so as to entice the more sluggish through the 
music. At any rate it is said that he, being truly full of divine wisdom, published three million lines. 

AM 5868 (AD 375/6]
Year of the divine Incarnation 368
Valens, emperor of the Romans (3 years),  1st year
 

Artaxer, emperor of the Persians (4 years), 3rd year Damasus, bishop of Rome (28 years), 24th year Demophilos, 
bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 6th year Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem (35 years), 10th year
Lucius, bishop of Alexandria  (6 years), 3rd year Meletios, bishop of Antioch (25 years), 4th year
In this year the heresy of the Messalians, that is of the Euchites and Enthusiasts, sprouted up. They dance and rattle 
castanets while singing psalms because of their crude and stupid interpretation of David's words. The leaders of this 
heresy were Dadoes, Sabas, Adelphios, and, according to some, Eustathios of Sebasteia. They were nobly resisted 
by Amphilochios of Ikonion, Letoios of Melitene, and later by Flavian of Antioch.
Valens, having destroyed every church, came to Caesarea from the East, raging against the holy Basil. He did those 
deeds which Gregory the Great related in the Funeral Oration on Basil. It was at that time that Valens' son Galates 
died after a severe illness and his wife Domnica fell seriously ill. When Demosthenes, one of Valens' cooks, had 
come upon the holy Basil in conversation with the emperor, and had spoken like a barbarian, the teacher smiled a 
little and said to him, 'Well, we see that even Demosthenes is unlettered.' Valens, in awe of Basil, granted him 
numerous fine estates for the lepers he cared for. Seeing how firm and unswerving Basil was he
64	decided to banish him, but when he wanted to sign the letter of banishment, he was unable to do so: he broke 
three pens and finally even his hand was paralysed.

 

 

Valens, 2nd year Artaxer, 4th year Damasus, 25th year







98 



Demophilos, 7th year Cyril, 11th year Lucius, 4th year Meletios, 5th year
In this year Mauia, queen of the Saracens, who had done much harm to the Romans, sought peace and asked that a 
certain Moses, one of the desert ascetics, be made bishop for those of her Saracens who practised Christianity. When 
the emperor accepted this eagerly, Moses insisted that he be ordained not by the Arian Lucius, but by one of the 
orthodox who were in exile. This was done. Mauia took him and made many Christians among the Saracens. They 
say that she herself was a Christian and a Roman by race, and that after she had been taken prisoner, she pleased the 
emperor of the Saracens by her beauty, and so she gained control of the empire. Sozomen relates many things about 
this race, its origins and name and that they are circumcised at the age of 13.
The Goths, after the Huns had made war on them, sought help from Valens through Euphilas, their Arian minded 
bishop, who had earlier been an associate of the Arians Eudoxios and Akakios in the time of Constantius. It was he 
who taught the Goths to be Arians. The Goths were divided into two. Athanarich led one group, Fritigern the other; 
the latter was defeated but, after receiving help from Valens, defeated the supporters of Athanarich. In order to 
please Valens he taught the Goths to become Arian all the more.

AM 5870 (AD 377/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 370
Valens, emperor of the Romans (3 years), 3rd year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (5 years), 1st year Damasus, 
bishop of Rome (28 years), 26th year
Demophilos, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 8th year Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem (35 years), 12th year
Lucius, bishop of Alexandria  (6 years), 5th year Meletios, bishop of Antioch  (25 years), 6th year
99
 
65  In this year the Goths, united again, invaded Roman territory and devastated numerous provinces, Scythia, 
Mysia, Thrace, Macedonia, Achaea, and all of Greece, about twenty provinces in all. In this period clouds in the 
shape of armed men were seen in the sky, and in Antioch a child was born, complete in its other parts, but having 
one eye in the middle of the forehead, four arms, four legs, and a beard. When Valens, who was residing in Antioch, 
heard about the Goths, he went to Constantinople. The Byzantines insulted him for being a coward who shunned 
war. Isaakios, the holy monk, grabbed hold of the bit of Valens' horse when he finally set out for war against the 
Goths and said to him, 'Where are you going, Emperor, you who are marching against God and have God as your 
opponent?' In fury the emperor had him imprisoned and threatened him with death if he ever returned, as Ahab once 
threatened Micah.
After his departure, some of his household acknowledged that on his command divination was carried out 
concerning his proposed rush into war. When battle was joined with the Goths, Valens was defeated and fled with a 
few others to a hut. The barbarians overtook him, set fire to the house and in ignorance incinerated all those inside. 
They say that the holy Isaakios, while in prison, became aware of the foul smell of Valens' being burned, and, by the 
grace of God and the pureness of his soul, foretold his death to those who were with him before the messengers from 
the war arrived to announce what had happened.
After the defeat and death of Valens by fire, the Goths, exulting in their victory, began to ravage terribly the suburbs 
of Constantinople. But Mauia, queen of the Saracens, sent a Saracen army, and Valens' wife Domnica, leading out 
the people from the city, chased off the barbarians.
When the Augustus Gratian learned how matters stood he marched down to Pannonia so as to offer assistance and, 
in the place
65	of Valens, invested Theodosios as Augustus, proclaimed him emperor, and sent him to make war on the 
Goths. The patrician Trajan states in his History that the Scythians are called Goths in the local dialect.
Dorotheos, numbered among the holy, was martyred under the impious Valens having been thrown by the Arians to 
the wild beasts in the Kynegion   at Alexandria.
100 

 

Year of the divine Incarnation 371
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (16 years), 1st year Sabores, emperor of the Persians ( 5 years), 2nd year 
Damasus, bishop of Rome (28 years), 27th year Demophilos, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 9th year Cyril, 
bishop of Jerusalem ( 35 years), 13th year	     Lucius, bishop of Alexandria (6 years), 6th year Meletios, bishop of 
Antioch (25 years), 7th year
In this year the emperor Gratian took Theodosios as partner in the Empire.  He was a western Iberian by race, of 
noble birth and admirably capable in war. Being pious and orthodox, he immediately won a victory by force of arms 
over the barbarians in Thrace. Gratian and Valentinian introduced a law recalling the bishops in exile and expelled 
the Arians, with the help of Damasus, the Pope of Rome. Then Peter, bishop of Alexandria, returned and after 
driving out Lucius, regained his own throne, but died a short time thereafter. His brother Timothy was ordained in 
his place as bishop of the Church of the orthodox in Alexandria. At Antioch in Syria, where the orthodox were split 
in two following the events surrounding the holy Eustathios, one group had Paulinus as their bishop, the other had 
the holy Meletios after the promotion of Euzoios, the bishop of the Arians in Antioch who had seceded from them. 
The emperors introduced a law in favour of the orthodox and entrusted a certain general Sapor to convey it to the 
East. When he arrived in Antioch, he found that there was strife between Paulinus, who was laying claim to the 
bishop's office, and Apolinarios, who was also making a bid for the throne, while the holy Meletios was  67










IOI
 



keeping his peace and avoiding conflict. Flavian, a presbyter at the time, being opposed to Paulinus and putting 
Apolinarios to shame, recommended that the general Sapor hand over the throne to Meletios; after establishing the 
latter he departed. Then the great Meletios ordained Diodoros bishop of Tarsos.
Eusebios, bishop of Samosata, after returning from banishment, ordained many bishops in various cities. He went to 
Doliche to ordain Maris as bishop, but as he entered the city, he was killed by an Arian woman who, from high up, 
threw a tile at the holy man's sacred head, this being allowed by God's inscrutable judgement; concerning which 
Gregory the Theologian says, 'I seek for myself your sacrifice of yesterday, the old man descended from Abraham'.3 
At that time Gregory the Theologian was teaching with great boldness in Constantinople at the chapel of St 
Anastasia, where, they say, marvellous miracles occurred through the manifestation of our all holy lady, the Mother 
of God.

(AM 5872, AD 379/80]
Theodosios, 2nd year 		        Sabores, 3rd year 		     Damasus, 28th year 		      
Demophilos, 10th year 		          Cyril, 14th year		    Timothy, bishop of Alexandria  ( 8 years),  
1st year Meletios,  8th year

 
Theodosios, 3rd year Sabores, 4th year
Siricius, bishop of Rome (15 years), 1st year 







102
 

Demophilos,  IIth year Cyril, 15th year Timothy, 2nd year Meletios, 9th year

 
Year of the divine Incarnation 374
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (16 years), 4th year Sabores, emperor of the Persians (s years),  5th year	 
Siricius, bishop of Rome ( r s years), 2nd year	   Demophilos,  bishop  of  Constantinople  (12 years),  12th 
year Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem ( 35 years),  16th year	        Timothy, bishop of Alexandria (8 years),  3rd year     
Meletios, bishop of Antioch (25 years),  10th year
  In this year the emperor Gratian was killed by the deceit of Andragathios, the general of the usurper Maximus. For 
this man arrived in a carriage pretending to be Gratian's wife. Thus    68 Andragathios was able to meet Gratian 
when he was unprotected and killed him. On his death Valentinian gained control of the Roman Empire.
At the same time Theodosios the elder, after falling ill, was baptized in Thessalonica by bishop Acholios. He wrote a 
law on the consubstantial in support of the orthodox, which he dispatched to Constantinople. After arriving in 
Constantinople Theodosios made it clear to Demophilos that he must either abandon the error of Arius or leave the 
churches with all speed. Demophilos collected the throng of the Arians and held church services outside the city, 
being also accompanied by Lucius, the Arian bishop of  Alexandria.  And thus at last the holy Gregory, with those 
whom he himself had baptized into the orthodox faith, received back  all the churches, which the Arians had held 
for rather more than forty years.








 
103
 



 

Theodosios, 5th year
Vararanes, 12th emperor of the Persians ( II years),  1st year Siricius, 3rd year
Gregory the Theologian, bishop of Constantinople (2 years), 1st year Cyril, 17th year
Timothy, 4th year Meletios, 11th year
In this year in Antioch, in the district of the Iobitai (as it is called) a woman gave birth to male quadruplets. They 
survived for two months, and then, one by one, all four died.

 

Theodosios, 6th year Vararanes, 2nd year Siricius, 4th year Gregory, 2nd year Cyril, 18th year Timothy, 5th year 
Meletios, 12th year
  In this year the Second great and holy ecumenical Synod of the 150 orthodox bishops was gathered in 
Constantinople by Theodosios the elder to confirm the tenets of Nicaea. It even summoned the 36 bishops of the 
heresy of Makedonios who were led by Eleusios. The leaders of the 150 holy fathers were Timothy of Alexandria, 
the most sacred Meletios of Antioch, the most sacred Cyril of Jerusalem, and the holy Gregory of Constantinople. 
The 36 bishops who followed the views of Makedonios were urged by the fathers to accept
69  the tenets of Nicaea, just as the supporters of Silvanus, who had been sent to Rome in the time of Valens, had 
agreed to give statements to Liberius. But they refused to agree to the truth and left, being a laughing-stock to all, 
believing one thing and agreeing to another, while fraudulently introducing Liberius' letters as evidence of their 
orthodoxy
The Holy Synod ratified the see of Constantinople for Gregory the Theologian, and installed him, despite his 
reluctance, on his throne inasmuch as he had toiled greatly and had freed the city from the disease of the heresies. 
But when Gregory, wise in all matters and most
104
 

blessed, learned that some of the Egyptians begrudged this action, he made a valedictory speech and voluntarily 
withdrew from the throne of the capital. After he had renounced it, the emperor and the synod appointed Nektarios, a 
native of Tarsos who held at the time the office of praetor and happened not to be yet baptized, but was living a 
worthy and devout life. The holy ecumenical synod ratified the consubstantial and added the doctrine of the Spirit to 
the creed. It also published canons in which it assigned the privileges of New Rome to the see of Constantinople.
Gregory of Nyssa, Pelagios of Laodikeia, Eulogios of Edessa, and Amphilochios of Ikonion acted with distinction at 
this synod together with Gregory the Great and those previously mentioned.
The Holy Synod anathematized Arius and Eusebios of Nicomedia, Euzoios and Akakios, Theognis and Euphronios 
and the others, and in addition to these it condemned Makedonios, the enemy of the Spirit, Eudoxios, Aetios, and 
Eunomios. After the completion of the synod the great Meletios died in peace in Constantinople. His holy body was 
conveyed to Antioch and placed near the tomb of the holy martyr Babylas. Flavian was ordained bishop of Antioch 
while Paulinus was still alive, even though oaths had been given that Flavian would not receive episcopal ordination. 
And so disorder prevailed again in the Church of Antioch, with some obeying Paulinus and others Flavian.
At that time the emperor brought the body of Paul the confessor to Constantinople and placed it in the church which 
Makedonios had built while plotting against Paul.

 



 

Theodosios, 7th year Vararanes, 3rd year Siricius, 5th year
Nektarios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 1st year Cyril, 19th year					 
Timothy, 6th year Meletios, 13th year
In this year the Augustus Theodosios proclaimed Honorius, his son by the most pious Placilla, as consul [with the 
title] epiphanestatos. He made preparations for war against the usurper Maximus. While he was fighting him in the 
West, a false rumour was spread that Maximus had won, whereupon the Arians went on a rampage and set fire to the 
house of Nektarios, the bishop of Constantinople. 

 


(AM 5 878, AD 385/6)
Theodosios, 8th year Vararanes, 4th year Siricius, 6th year Nektarios, 2nd year Cyril, 20th year Timothy, 7th year 
Meletios,  14th year
In this year in Antioch an extension was made to the so-called Taurian gate to the full width of the bridge and was 
covered with a roof. A small basilica was also built at the old Basilica, near the great one. In he village of Emmaus 
in Palestine, a child was born perfectly normal below the navel but divided above it, so that it had two chests and 
two heads, each possessing the senses. One would eat
 

and drink but the other did not eat; one would sleep but the other stayed awake. There were times when they played 
with each other, when both cried and hit each other. They lived for a little over two years. One died while the other 
lived for another four days and it, too, died.
In the same year the emperor Theodosios set up the column of the Tauros.


 

Theodosios, 9th year Vararanes, 5th year Siricius, 7th year Nektarios, 3rd year Cyril, 21st year Timothy, 7th year 
Meletios, 15th year
In this year after the death of Timothy, bishop of Alexandria, on the 26th of the month Epiphi, Theophilos was 
ordained in his place.


 

 
Theodosios, 10th year Vararanes, 6th year Siricius, 8th year Nektarios, 4th year
 





















107
 



Cyril, 22nd year
Theophilos, bishop of Alexandria (28 years), 1st year Meletios, 16th year
In this year the pious emperor Theodosios, after defeating the usurper Maximus, killed him on the 12th day before 
the kalends of August, and also Andragathios, Maximus' general, who had murdered Gratian. 

 

Theodosios, 11th year Vararanes, 7th year Siricius, 9th year Nektarios, 5th year Cyril, 23rd year Theophilos, 2nd 
year Meletios, 17th year
In this year Theodosios came to Rome with his son Honorius and established him as emperor there on the 5th day 
before the Ides of June, and then went back to Constantinople.

 

Theodosios, 12th year Vararanes, 8th year Siricius, 10th year Nektarios,  6th year Cyril, 24th year Theophilos, 3rd 
year Meletios,  18th year







108
 


In this year occurred the usurpation of Eugenios, the ex-schoolmaster turned secretary, who donned the imperial 
regalia, with Argabastes, a native of the lesser Galatia, as his associate. When Valentinian the younger, son of the 
elder Valentinian and Justa, heard of this, he committed suicide by hanging himself. After Theodosios heard the 
news, he began arming to go out and avenge him.
Theophilos, bishop of Alexandria, after applying to the emperor Theodosios, cleansed the pagan temple in 
Alexandria and turned it into a church and also made public the secret rites of the pagans, including their phalli and 
other things even more lewd and more profane. As a result, the mass of pagans out of shame committed numerous 
murders. When Theodosios learned of the murders committed by them, he lauded the murdered Christians as 
martyrs and promised to forgive the pagans if they converted to Christianity. He ordered that their temples be 
destroyed and that the idols be melted down and given for the needs of the poor. When the temple of Serapis in 
Alexandria was being pulled down, hieroglyphic writings were discovered in the shape of the cross; when the 
pagans who became Christian saw them they said that according to the meaning of hieroglyphic writing the cross 
signified the life to come.


 

Year of the divine Incarnation 383
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (16 years), 13th year Vararanes, emperor of the Persians (11 years), 9th year 
Siricius, bishop of Rome (15 years), 11th year
Nektarios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 7th year Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem (35 years), 25th year Theophilos, 
bishop of Alexandria  (28 years), 4th year Meletios, bishop of Antioch (25 years), 19th year






109
 

In this year Marcellus, the bishop of Apameia in Syria, moved by divine zeal, overthrew the temples of the pagans in 
Apameia, and because of this was murdered by the pagans. As for Nektarios of Constantinople, he issued an 
interdict against the presbyter in
72  charge of penance because of a sin committed in church by a certain deacon against a woman who was there to 
do penance. In Rome and throughout the West this [institution] is carefully preserved even up to the present, and a 
place is set aside for the penitents. The emperor Theodosios introduced a law that a woman could not advance to the 
diaconate unless she had passed the age of 60 in accordance with the Apostle. He banished Eunomios for setting up 
a rival congregation and for deceiving the people. Eunomios died in exile.
In the same year Theodosios' wife, Placilla, died. She was pious and charitable to the poor and used to minister to 
lepers and the sick with her own hands. The people of Antioch smashed her statue and dragged it about in fury over 
the taxes which the emperor had imposed on them. He was exceedingly angry because of his affection for the most 
pious Placilla and would have put them all to death had not Flavian, the bishop of Antioch, gone and made 
representations on behalf of the people of Antioch. John Chrysostom, who was then a presbyter at Antioch and 
present [at these events], delivered some magnificent orations to reprove those who had shown such daring against 
the imperial statues.

 

 
Theodosios, 14th year Vararanes, 10th year Siricius, 12th year Nektarios, 8th year Cyril, 26th year Theophilos, 5th 
year Meletios, 20th year
 




















IIO
 

In this year, when Theodosios had marched against the usurper Eugenios and reached Thessalonica with his army 
and entered the city, the inhabitants rioted because of the billets for the army and on some excuse concerning a 
charioteer and the prefect's son. They insulted the emperor and murdered the prefect. The emperor restrained his 
temper for a while and having silenced the people ordered the races to be held. But when the people and the 
partisans were gathered to watch the races, he ordered the army to shoot them with arrows. Fifteen thousand people 
perished.
When Theodosios entered Milan, the bishop Ambrose refused to let him enter the church. At the festival of the birth 
of the Saviour, when the magister Rufinus had come to intercede [on the emperor's behalf] Ambrose reproved him 
severely. When Theodosios at  73 the instigation of Ambrose introduced a law that a thirty-day respite for further 
examination be granted to those condemned to death or confiscation, then Ambrose received him into the church 
outside the altar precinct, and not inside it as had been the previous practice. From this comes the excellent custom 
which has prevailed until now that emperors should stand outside the altar precinct with the congregation. 
In the same year, when the river Nile did not rise in the usual way, the pagans rejoiced claiming that the reason for 
this was that they had been prevented from sacrificing to their gods. When the pious emperor learned of this, he 
replied, 'May it never happen that a river, which rejoices in sacrifice, should flood the land.' And God gave His 
assent and blessed the rising of the river to such an extent that everyone in Egypt feared lest the flooding of the 
water submerge even Alexandria itself.

AM 5885 (AD 392/3]
Year of the divine Incarnation 385
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (16 years), 15th year Vararanes, emperor of the Persians (11 years), 11th year 
Siricius, bishop of Rome (15 years), 13th year
I





111 



Nektarios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 9th year Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem (35 years), 27th year Theophilos, 
bishop of Alexandria (28 years), 6th year Meletios, bishop of Antioch (25 years), 21st year
In this year the pious emperor Theodosios fought bravely against Eugenios at the passes to the Alps, and, after 
capturing him alive, executed him. Argabastes escaped and committed suicide.
In the same year, the relics of the prophets Habakkuk and Micah were found with God's aid in two villages in the 
district of Eleutheropolis by Zebenos, bishop of Eleutheropolis in Palestine, who had had a vision.
When the emperor reached Rome3 a number of bishops approached him with a motion from Innocent4 of Rome 
against Flavian, bishop of Antioch. The most Christian emperor, after exhorting them to peace united them after 
seventeen years,
74	ordering that bishops from the East should come to Rome for this, among whom was sent Akakios of Beroia. 
Theodosios conferred many benefits on the Romans. He also put an end to the outrageous practice in the bakeries 
whereby condemned foreigners were locked away in the mills until they reached old age, and similarly he would not 
allow adulterous women to be outraged any longer by being locked up in brothels and being reproved for their deed 
by the ringing of a bell.

[AM 5886, AD 393/4]
Theodosios, 16th year Vararanes, 12th year








112
 




Siricius, 14th year Nektarios, 10th year Cyril, 28th year Theophilos, 7th year Meletios, 22nd year
	In this year, after the destruction of the usurper Eugenios and the settlement of affairs, the pious emperor 
Theodosios departed from Rome and set out for Constantinople. But on reaching Milan he fell sick and sent for his 
son Honorius, and having seen him, he felt bet­ ter. After watching the races, he was suddenly taken ill after lunch, 
and not having the strength to attend the races in the afternoon, he ordered his son to complete them. The following 
night he died in the Lord at the age of 60, having been emperor for sixteen years, and leaving his two sons as 
emperors, the elder Arkadios in the East and Honorius in the West. Arkadios brought his body to Constantinople and 
buried it at the Holy Apostles.

[AM 5887, AD 394/5)
Arkadios, son of Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (14 years), 1st year
Isdigerdes, emperor of the Persians (21 years), 1st year 
Siricius, 15th year Nektarios, 11th year Cyril, 29th year Theophilos, 8th year Meletios, 23rd year
In this year Arkadios, on being appointed autokrator, built the big portico opposite the Praetorium.










113
 


(AM 5888, AD 395/6)
Arkadios, 2nd year Isdigerdes, 2nd year
Anastasios, 38th bishop of Rome (3 years), 1st year 
Nektarios, 12th year Cyril, 30th year Theophilos, 9th year Meletios, 24th year

 

Arkadios, 3rd year Isdigerdes, 3rd year Anastasios, 2nd year Nektarios, 13th year Cyril, 31st year Theophilos, 10th 
year Meletios, 25th year

75	AM 5890 (AD 397/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 390
Arkadios,  emperor of the Romans  (14 years),  4th year Isdigerdes, emperor of the Persians ( 2 1 years), 4th year 
Innocent, bishop of Rome (15 years), 1st year    Nektarios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 14th year Cyril, 
bishop of Jerusalem ( 35 years), 32nd year	   Theophilos, bishop of Alexandria (28 years), 11th year Flavian, 
bishop of Antioch (22 years), 1st year
In this year the relics of the holy prophet John the Forerunner and Baptist were translated to Alexandria, on the 6th 
day before the kalends of July, the 2nd of the month Pauni.







114
 


 

Arkadios, 5th year Isdigerdes, 5th year Innocent, 2nd year Nektarios, 15th year     Cyril, 33rd year  Theophilos, 
12th year Flavian, 2nd year
In this year Anatalios the illustrissimus was burned in Alexandria. The   emperor   Arkadios	created   his   
own   military    unit   in Constantinople, which he called the Arcadiaci.

 

Arkadios, 6th year Isdigerdes, 6th year Innocent, 3rd year Nektarios, 16th year     Cyril, 34th year Theophilos, 13th 
year Flavian, 3rd year
 In this · year Nektarios, bishop of Constantinople, died. Theophilos, bishop of Alexandria, who was present, was 
eager to prevent the election of John Chrysostom, and [recommended] his own presbyter, a certain Isidore, testifying 
that he should be bishop of the capital. Isidore had served Theophilos at the time when Theodosios was waging war 
on the tyrant Maximus and had been entrusted by him (Theophilos) with two letters and gifts. But the emperor and 
the whole city were pleased to ordain John, who had been summoned from Antioch by the emperor for this purpose. 
John was among the most distinguished men of Antioch; his father was Secundus and his mother Anthousa. He was 
extremely eloquent, largely from divine grace, and was admired even by the most skilled sophists among the pagans; 
hence, when Libanios was close to death and was asked by





115
 



his students, 'Who should take over the school after you? ' he replied, 'I would have said John, had not the Christians 
snatched him away from us.' Chrysostom was taught the Holy Scriptures by a certain Karterios, abbot of a 
monastery, and received his general education from the aforementioned Libanios.
76  In the same year a son was born  to the emperor Arkadios by the Augusta Eudoxia, namely Theodosios the 
younger whom John Chrysostom  sponsored  at his  baptism.

 


 
Arkadios, 7th year Isdigerdes, 7th year Innocent, 4th year
John Chrysostom, bishop of  Constantinople  (6 years),  1st year 
Cyril, 35th year Theophilos, 14th year Flavian, 4th year
In the seventh year of Arkadios,  a son was born to him by Eudoxia, namely Theodosios  the younger.

 
Arkadios, 8th year Isdigerdes, 8th year Innocent, 5th year John, 2nd year
John, bishop of Jerusalem (16 years), 1st year







 116
 

Theophilos, 15th year Flavian, 5th year
In this year Camas usurped power from Arkadios and did much harm in Byzantium. After exchanging oaths with 
Arkadios in the church of St. Euphemia in Chalcedon, he broke them and, after doing more harm, he entered the city 
where he went plundering and committing other atrocities. He then left for the Thracian Chersonese where, after 
building rafts, he made preparations to cross over into Asia to seize the eastern cities. But after a violent  war had  
broken out there on land and sea he perished  with his army.


 

Arkadios, 9th year Isdigerdes, 9th year Innocent, 6th year John, 3rd year       John, 2nd year Theophilos,  16th 
year Flavian, 6th year
	In this year Honorius stirred up confusion and discord in Rome. Aroused against the citizens because of some 
minor matters and not checking his anger, he moved to Ravenna,  a coastal city in Italy. He then sent one of his 
ministers, a barbarian of Gallic race, at the head of a large army with orders to plunder and harass those who had 
wronged him. So Rome was besieged by him and narrowly escaped being completely destroyed. But Alaric put 
himself at the disposal of the senators of the city, and after taking all the money from the palace and Honorius' sister 
(on his father's side) Placidia, who was then a young maiden, returned to his own nation in Gaul. But a certain 
Constantius, who was a comes with Alaric, being entrusted with the maiden Placidia, fled with her and brought her 
to the emperor Honorius. The emperor received Constantius and made him a senator. A little later he gave 
Constantius the girl in 77     marriage and proclaimed him emperor. He had a son by her whom he called 
Valentinian the younger. Constantius campaigned with Honorius



117
 



and destroyed  the usurpers in Rome, and they confiscated their houses and brought peace to the city.
The great teacher John illuminated not only the Church of Constantinople, but also those of Thrace, Asia, and Pontos 
so that, even before the Holy Synod at Chalcedon, the bishop of Constantinople was the leader of those Churches. A 
certain follower of Makedonios returned to the Church because of the Father's teaching. This man, after exhorting 
his wife to convert and take communion, was scarcely able to persuade her.  She, for her part, gave to her maid the 
sacraments of the Macedonians, and bade her keep them. She then approached Chrysostom, received the sacrament 
from his holy hands, and, pretending to partake of it, at the last moment gave it to her maid and took the 
Macedonians' sacrament, which she put in her mouth but found it had turned to stone. Shuddering with fear she fell 
at the feet of John, confessing her effrontery, and sincerely joined the Church. The stone was placed in the sacristy 
for safekeeping.
Chrysostom's letter to Theodore of Mopsuestia was addressed not to the first [Theodore] but to the later one.
The great Arsenios, [at first] a layman, renounced everything and began practising sacred philosophy in Egypt, and 
so became conspicuous in the monastic order for his way of life, his teaching and his miracles.
In the same year Arkadios set up the column of Xerolophos and founded Arkadioupolis  in Thrace. 










118
 

 

Year of the divine Incarnation 396
Arkadios, emperor of the Romans (14 years), 10th year Isdigerdes, emperor of the Persians (2 1 years), 10th year 
Innocent, bishop of Rome (15 years), 7th year
John, bishop of Constantinople (6 years), 4th year John, bishop of Jerusalem (16 years), 3rd year Theophilos, bishop 
of Alexandria (28 years), 17th year Flavian, bishop of Antioch (22 years), 7th year
 In this year John Chrysostom was particularly conspicuous for his way of life, his teaching, and his divine gifts as 
well as 78  for being  scrupulous in every virtue. He was loved by the whole congregation, which was greatly 
edified by his teaching, but those who lived a profligate life shunned him and collaborated to make war on him. At 
this juncture occurred the affair of the eunuch Eutropios, and furthermore the rivalry between Severianus of Gabala 
and John's archdeacon Sarapion, the matter of the Tall [Brothers] who had fled from Egypt because of Theophilos, 
and Theophilos' correspondence with Epiphanios. In all of these John, the servant of God, was being plotted against. 
Epiphanios of Cyprus came to the Hebdomon, and held ordinations and services contrary to John's wish. But 
although John overlooked this because of his holy love and indeed invited Epiphanios to stay in the episcopal 
residence with him, Epiphanios









119
 



did not choose to do so, having been won over by Theophilos' slanders against the blessed John.


 

Arkadios, 11th year Isdigerdes, 11th year Innocent, 8th year John, 5th year
John, 4th year Theophilos, 18th year Flavian, 8th year
In this year John Chrysostom gave a sermon against evil women, which the enemies of truth, who were ill disposed 
to him, used in order to provoke Eudoxia by claiming that the sermon had been aimed against her. She then told 
Arkadios how terribly she had suffered through John and drove him to summon Theophilos, who was obviously 
John's enemy. When Theophilos arrived at the Oak, which is now called Rufinianae, he contrived a plot against 
John, whom they banished from the city. When the people came to know of this, they caused a great riot and would 
not allow John to be expelled. At this Eudoxia, moved by the lament of the people, appealed to the emperor 
Arkadios, who sent the eunuch Brison to










120
 

recall John from Prainetos. John, however, refused to enter the city before there was an inquiry by the synod and 
resided in a suburb at Anaplous. The people, shouting at the emperors, forced them to bring John back and establish 
him on his throne. As a result Theophilos and his party fled in fear from the city. Thereupon sixty bishops gathered 
and justly confirmed that all the charges    79 made by Theophilos and his supporters against the holy John were 
invalid.

 

Arkadios, 12th year Isdigerdes, 12th year Innocent, 9th year John, 6th year
John, 5th year Theophilos, 19th year Flavian, 9th year
In this year the empress Eudoxia had a silver statue made of herself and set it up in a place called Pittakia near St 
Eirene. The City Prefect, being a Manichaean and a supporter of paganism, organized noisy choirs and dancing in 
front of the statue and raised a commotion, which distressed John since it did not allow him to celebrate the holy 
liturgy in peace. For it frequently interrupted the psalm singing. The holy John inveighed verbally against the 
prefect, who roused Eudoxia against John, saying that the latter was annoyed by the honour given to her statue. So 
once again there was hatred and anger against John. He then delivered a sermon that began, 'Once again Herodias is 
frenzied'. At this the empress's hostility towards him reached its peak and, once again, came deposition and 
banishment. The people set fire to the church and many risked danger on John's behalf. John was driven from the 
city and banished to







121
 



Koukousos, from where he was transferred to Pityous. When he was at Komana in the approaches of Armenia, he 
died in the Lord. After his banishment Arsakios was ordained. He was the brother of Nektarios who had preceded 
Chrysostom. However, Innocent of Rome and Flavian of Antioch did not agree to John's banishment, but wrote a 
letter of consolation to the clergy of the city and showed their displeasure at these shameless acts.
Epiphanios set sail for Cyprus, for it seems that God forewarned him of his death. They say that he also revealed to 
John his death in exile and John told Epiphanios that his would be on a ship. Epiphanios said to those who were 
seeing him off, 'I go in haste and I leave to you the books, the city, and the [art of] hypocrisy.'
In the same year Eudoxia, too, died.

 
Arkadios, 13th year Isdigerdes, 13th year














122
 

Innocent, 10th year
Arsakios, bishop of Constantinople (2 years), 1st year John, 6th year
Theophilos, 20th year Flavian, 10th year
In this year, while the emperor Arkadios was at Karya where, they say, the holy martyr Akakios had suffered, he 
prayed and     80 left the church and immediately after that the huge church at Karya collapsed.  The crowd, who 
were saved, ascribed their safety to the emperor's prayer.



[AM 5900, AD 407/8]
Arkadios, 14th year Isdigerdes, 14th year Innocent, 11th year Arsakios, 2nd year John, 7th year Theophilos, 21st 
year Flavian, 11th year
In his year the earth in Rome groaned for seven days. And in Ravenna Stilicho, the illustrissimus, was murdered, as 
well as other powerful people, in the very year Arkadios died, on the eleventh day before the kalends of September.
Arkadios, perceiving that his son, the young Theodosios, was still very small and unprotected and fearing that 
someone would plot against him, proclaimed him emperor and in his will appointed the Persian emperor Isdigerdes 
his guardian. Isdigerdes, the Persian emperor, after accepting Arkadios' will, behaved most pacifically towards the 
Romans and preserved the Empire for Theodosios. After dispatching Antiochos, a most remarkable and highly 
educated adviser and instructor, he wrote to the Roman Senate as follows: 'Since Arkadios has died and has 
appointed me as his child's guardian, I have sent the man who will take my place. Let no one









123
 



attempt a plot against the child so that I need not stir up an implacable war against the Romans.' After Antiochos had 
come, he stayed at the emperor's side. Theodosios was educated wisely in Christian matters by his uncle Honorius 
and his sister Pulcheria. And there was peace between the Romans and the Persians, especially since Antiochos 
produced many writings on behalf of the Christians; and thus Christianity was spread in Persia, with the bishop of 
Mesopotamia, Marouthas,  acting as mediator.

AM 5901 (AD 408/9)
Year of the divine Incarnation 401
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (42 years), 1st year Isdigerdes, emperor of the Persians (21 years), 15th year 
Innocent, bishop of Rome (15 years), 12th year     Attikos, bishop of Constantinople (20 years), 1st year John, 
bishop of Jerusalem (16 years), 8th year

















124
 

Theophilos, bishop of Alexandria  (28 years), 22nd year Flavian, bishop of Antioch (22 years), 12th year
In this year, on the death of the emperor Arkadios, who had ruled after the death of his father Theodosios 14 years, 3 
months, 81     and 14 days (having already ruled jointly with his father for twelve years), he left his son 
Theodosios as emperor, then 8 years old, who had ruled jointly with his father Arkadios for six years. When 
Theodosios became sole ruler, his sister Pulcheria, who was a virgin 15 years old, managed the Empire excellently 
with the help of God. He had two other sisters, Arkadia and Marina, whom Pulcheria persuaded to live a virgin life. 
Possessing great wisdom and a holy mind, she educated her brother Theodosios. She gave her brother Theodosios a 
royal training, above all in piety towards God, but also in character, speech, gait, laughter, dress, deportment, and 
behaviour. After building numerous churches, poorhouses, hostels, and monasteries, she endowed all of them with 
appropriate income in imperial style. Sozomen says about her that she was even deemed worthy of divine 
manifestation.


[AM 5902, AD 409/ 10)
Theodosios, 2nd year Isdigerdes, 16th year Innocent, 13th year Attikos, 2nd year John, 9th year Theophilos, 23rd 
year Flavian, 13th year
In this year, Attikos, bishop of Constantinople, having admonished a certain Jew who was paralytic, and having 
persuaded him and baptized him, brought him from the font restored to health. For Attikos was said to have lived 
according to God.







125
 

(AM 5903, AD 410/11)
Theodosios, 3rd year Isdigerdes, 17th year Innocent, 14th year Attikos, 3rd year John, 10th year Theophilos, 24th 
year Flavian, 14th year
  In this year Rome was captured by Alaric on the 9th day before the kalends of September. And after a few days 
Constantine, the illustrissimus, was put to death along with many others.


 

Theodosios, 4th year Isdigerdes, 18th year Innocent, 15th year Attikos, 4th year   John, 11th year Theophilos, 25th 
year Flavian, 15th year
   In this year Jovian and Sebastian, both illustrissimi, were put to death in Gaul. Their heads were brought to 
Rome, and fifteen days later Salustius and Herakleianos were put to death.












I26
 


 

Theodosios, 5th year Isdigerdes, 19th year
Zosimos, bishop of Rome (8 years), 1st year 
Attikos, 5th year  John, 12th year Theophilos, 26th year Flavian, 16th year
  In this year the Jews in Alexandria did much harm to the Christians. For after agreeing among themselves to wear 
a ring of palm wood, they caused the heralds to shout out during the night that the church had been set on fire. When 
the Christians had gathered together, the Jews slaughtered them. When this act was  82 discovered, the Christian 
magistrates  expelled the Jews from Alexandria and confiscated their property.
In the same year Antiochos the Persian departed and the blessed Pulcheria gained complete control of affairs.




























127
 



AM 5 906 [AD 413/14]
Year of the divine Incarnation 406
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (42 years), 6th year Isdigerdes, emperor of the Persians (2I years), 20th year 
Zosimos, bishop of Rome (8 years), 2nd year
Attikos, bishop of Constantinople (20 years), 6th year John, bishop of Jerusalem (16 years), 13th year Theophilos, 
bishop of Alexandria (28 years), 27th year Flavian, bishop of Antioch (22 years), 17th year
   In this year certain persons killed violently the philosopher Hypatia, the daughter of the philosopher Theon.
In the same year the Persian emperor, Isdigerdes, who had earlier been persuaded by the preachings of Marouthas, 
bishop of Mesopotamia, and Abdaas, bishop of the capital city in Persia, reached the pinnacle of piety, so that he 
was almost on the point of being baptized because of Marouthas' working of miracles, and was chastizing the magi 
for being impostors. But in his 20th year he was deceived by the magi and stirred up a great persecution of the 
Christians in Persia. He died in his 21st year.
The cause of the persecution was this. Abdaas, bishop of the capital city in Persia, driven by his zeal for God, but not 
applying this zeal where it was appropriate, set fire to the temple of Fire. When the emperor learned of this, he 
decreed that the churches in Persia be destroyed and punished Abdaas with various torments. The persecution lasted 
five years and many were declared martyrs beyond counting. For the magi carefully hunted down through the cities 
and villages those who had escaped notice. Some gave themselves up voluntarily so that they would not appear to 
have denied Christ by
83 their silence. With the Christians being killed unsparingly, a great many were destroyed even in the emperor's 
palace. Many others sought refuge among the Romans.






128
 

 


Theodosios, 7th year Isdigerdes, 21st year Zosimos, 3rd year Attikos, 7th year John, 14th year Theophilos, 28th year 
Flavian, 18th year
   In this year, Theophilos, bishop of Alexandria, died, and his nephew Cyril was appointed in his place.
In the same year Hesychios, presbyter at Jerusalem, flourished in his teaching.

 (AM 5908, AD 415 /6)
Theodosios, 8th year
Vararanes, emperor of the Persians (20 years), 1st year 1
Zosimos, 4th year Attikos, 8th year John, 15th year
Cyril, bishop of Alexandria (32 years), 1st year
Flavian, 19th year
   In this year the Jews caught a Christian boy at Immon, and, in jest, as it were, and to mock the cross they hanged 
the boy from a piece of wood, tortured, and killed him. When the emperor learned of this he punished the Jews 
suitably.
















129
 



 

Theodosios, 9th year Vararanes, 2nd year Zosimos, 5th year Attikos, 9th year John, 16th year
Cyril, 2nd year Flavian, 20th year



 
Theodosios, 10th year Vararanes, 3rd year Zosimos, 6th year Attikos,  10th year
[No entry for Jerusalem ]
Cyril, 3rd year Flavian, 21st year



 
Theodosios, 11th year Vararanes, 4th year Zosimos, 7th year Attikos, 11th year
Praylios, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 1st year Cyril, 4th year
Flavian, 22nd year
   In this year Attikos baptized the daughter of the philosopher Leontios, namely Athenais, and renamed her 
Eudokia. On the advice of Pulcheria she was married to Theodosios. She was remarkable for the beauty of her body, 
for the intelligence of her mind, and for her culture.
In the same year Valentinian, the  son of  Constantius  and  Galla Placidia, was born in Ravenna. 




130 


AM 5912 [AD 419/20]
Year of the divine Incarnation 412
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (42 years), 12th year Vararanes, emperor of the Persians (20 years), 5th year 
Zosimos, bishop of Rome (8 years), 8th year
Attikos, bishop of Constantinople (20 years), 12th year Praylios, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 2nd year
Cyril, bishop of Alexandria ( 32 years), 5th year Theodotos, bishop of Antioch ( 4 years),  1st year
  In this year the bishop Attikos, on seeing that the Johannites held their services outside the Church, ordained that 
the name of John   84    Chrysostom be commemorated in the diptychs of the Church, and united many people 
with the Church. 
In the same year Valentinian the younger, the son of Constantius and cousin of Theodosios, was born in Ravenna.



(AM 5 913, AD 420/1)
Theodosios, 13th year Vararanes, 6th year
Boniface, bishop of Rome ( 4 years), 1st year
Attikos, 13th year Praylios, 3rd year Cyril, 6th year Theodotos, 2nd year
   In this year Constantius, the father of Valentinian, became emperor on the 6th day before the ides of February. He 
was murdered on the 4th day before the nones of September.








131

 


 

Theodosios,  14th year Vararanes, 7th year Boniface, 2nd year Attikos,  14th year Praylios, 4th year Cyril, 7th year 
Theodotos, 3rd year
   In this year the augustalis Kallistos was murdered by his own slaves in Alexandria on the 10th of the month 
Thoth.


(AM 5915, AD 422/3)
Theodosios, 15th year Vararanes, 8th year Boniface, 3rd year Attikos, 15th year Praylios, 5th year Cyril, 8th year 
Theodotos, 4th year
   In this year the emperor Honorius died in Rome on 15 August. This was announced in Constantinople and the 
city was closed for seven days. After his death, a certain John, one of the imperial secretaries, seized the Empire in 
Rome and sent an embassy to Theodosios asking to be accepted as emperor. Theodosios locked the envoys up in 
prison and sent the general Ardabourios against him; but Ardabourios was apprehended by the usurper and locked up 
in Ravenna. When Theodosios learned of this, he sent the general's son, Aspar, against the usurper, and in answer to 
the prayer of the god loving emperor, an angel of the Lord appeared in the shape of a shepherd who guided Aspar 
and his companions and led them across the lake adjacent to Ravenna, which was impassable but which God made 
passable as He did in the time of the Israelites. So having got across by a dry path and finding the city gates open, 
they killed the usurper and freed Ardabourios from his chains. With the usurper
85	killed, the emperor Theodosios, having appointed Valentinian, the son of Constantius and Galla Placidia, as 
Caesar, sent him to the

132
 

West with his mother and also sent out the patrician Helion to see that he became established. He ruled 32 years.

(AM 5 916, AD 423/4]
Theodosios, 16th year Vararanes, 9th year Boniface, 4th year Attikos, 16th year Praylios, 6th year Cyril, 9th year
John, bishop of Antioch (18 years), 1st year
   In this year there was much disorder and mutual slaughter in Alexandria.
In the same year Theodosios sent, through the patrician Helion, the imperial crown to Valentinian in Rome.
Marouthas, bishop of Mesopotamia, cured by means of prayer and fasting Isdigerdes, the son of the Persian 
emperor, who was possessed by a demon. As a result Isdigerdes gained much confidence in Christianity.
















 



133
 



AM 5917 [AD 424/5)
Year of the divine Incarnation 417
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (42 years), 17th year Vararanes, emperor of the Persians (20 years), 10th year 
Celestinus, bishop of Rome (10 years), 1st year 
Attikos, bishop of Constantinople (20 years), 17th year Praylios, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 7th year
Cyril, bishop of Alexandria  (32 years), 10th year John, bishop of Antioch (18 years), 2nd year

[AM 5918, AD 425/6)
Theodosios, 18th year Vararanes, 11th year Celestinus, 2nd year Attikos, 18th year Praylios, 8th year Cyril, 11th 
year   John, 3rd year
   In this year, on the death of Isdigerdes, his son Vararanes succeeded both to his throne and to the persecution of 
piety, and sent ambassadors to Theodosios to demand back the fugitives. The Roman emperor Theodosios refused to 
hand them over. As a result, the peace treaty was annulled and a terrible war broke out.3 Theodosios sent out the 
general Ardabourios with a Roman force while Vararanes sent out the general Narsaios with a Persian force, together 
with many tens of thousands of Saracens in support. Ardabourios   reached   Persia, devastated the province called
86   Arzanene, and proceeded to Mesopotamia; similarly the Persian general reached Mesopotamia near the 
Euphrates. The Persians, think­ ing that the Roman force was attacking them, and made cowardly through God, 
threw themselves fully armed into the river and thus about one hundred thousand perished by drowning. The 
Romans encircled all the rest and killed all of them, including the ten thousand of the Immortals, as they are called 
by them, together with their generals. Thus Christ exacted justice from the Persians in retribution for the many pious 
people whom they had killed unjustly.

 



134
 

 

Year of the divine Incarnation 419
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (42 years), 19th year Vararanes, emperor of the Persians (20 years), 12th year 
Celestinus, bishop of Rome (10 years), 3rd year
Attikos, bishop of Constantinople (20 years), 19th year Praylios, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 9th year
Cyril, bishop of Alexandria (32 years), 12th year John, bishop of Antioch (18 years), 4th year
   In this year the relics of the prophet Zacharias were discovered in a village in the district of Eleutheropolis, and 
likewise those of Stephen, the first martyr, in the village of Kapargamala, where Gamaliel, the teacher of the apostle 
Paul, and his son Abibos had buried the body of the first martyr.

(AM 5920, AD 427/8]
Theodosios, 20th year Vararanes, 13th year Celestinus, 4th year Attikos, 20th year Praylios, 10th year Cyril, 13th 
year
John, 5th year
   In this year the pious Theodosios, in imitation of the blessed Pulcheria, sent much money to the archbishop of 
Jerusalem for









135
 



distribution among those in need. He also sent a golden cross, set with precious stones to be fixed on the holy site of 
Calvary. The archbishop sent as a return gift the relics of the right hand of the first martyr Stephen, by means of 
Passarion, one of the holy men.  In the very night that he reached Chalcedon the blessed Pulcheria saw St
87   Stephen saying to her in a vision, 'Behold, your prayer has been heard, your request is fulfilled, and I have 
come to Chalcedon.' She arose and, taking her brother, went out to meet the holy relics and, taking them into the 
palace, she built a wonderful church for the holy First Martyr and deposited his holy relics there.

(AM 5921, AD 428/9]
Theodosios, 21st year Vararanes, 14th year Celestinus, 5th year
Sisinnios, bishop of Constantinople (2 years), 1st year Praylios, 11th year
Cyril, 14th year John, 6th year
   In this year, moved by much goodness, the emperor Theodosios, although he had vanquished the Persians by 
force of arms, embraced peace to spare the Christians who were living in Persia, and sent as ambassadors the 
patrician Helion, whom he held in high esteem, and Anatolios, the magister militum per Orientem, to arrange peace. 
Vararanes, aware of his defeat, received the embassy and thus the persecution against the Christians ceased. The 
emperor Theodosios, giving thanks to God for such great benefits,  never ceased from honouring Him with hymns. 
To join him in these songs of praise he had his sisters who practised a life of virginity.
In the same year Sisinnios, bishop of Constantinople, ordained Proklos as bishop of Kyzikos. But the people of 
Kyzikos would not accept him and, against Sisinnios' wish, ordained a certain monk called Dalmatius. Not having 
his own church, Proklos carried on his distinguished teaching in Constantinople, at the instigation of Sisinnios.



136 
.................. J 7...., J




In the same year the persecution against the Christians in Persia ceased.

(AM 5922, AD  429/30]
Theodosios, 22nd year Vararanes, 15th year Celestinus, 6th year Sisinnios, 2nd year Praylios, 12th year Cyril, 15th 
year
John, 7th year
   In this year Philip, presbyter of Side, who had written a Christian history in thirty-six books, made many charges 
against Sisinnios because he, along with Proklos, had been preferred to Philip for the bishopric. Sisinnios died 
forthwith.

 
AM 5 923 (AD 430/1]	88
Year of the divine Incarnation 423
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (42 years), 23rd year Vararanes, emperor of the Persians (20 years), 16th year 
Celestinus, bishop of Rome (10 years), 7th year Nestorios, bishop of Constantinople ( 3 years), 1st year Praylios, 
bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 13th year
Cyril, bishop of Alexandria  (32 years), 16th year John, bishop of Antioch (18 years), 8th year
   In this year, following the death of Sisinnios, bishop of Constantinople, Nestorios, a native of  Germanikeia,   
succeeded to






137
 



the bishopric. As soon as he mounted the throne, his heresy and his doctrinally distorted mind were straight away 
revealed. For he gave a homily on the faith to his own synkellos 3 and ordered him to preach it in church. It was as 
follows: 'No one is to call Mary the Mother of God. For Mary was human, and it is not possible for God to be born 
from a human being. A certain Eusebios, a scholasticus in the Basilica of Constantinople, was the first to object to 
this statement which agitated many of the people of Byzantium. Nestorios, eager to confirm his statement, removed 
everywhere the expression 'the Mother of God', saying that the Lord was an ordinary man. One Sunday when 
Nestorios was presiding, Proklos, who had been invited to preach, gave a homily on the Mother of God, which 
began, 'Today is the Virgin's festival, brothers. Then the impious Nestorios became hated by all for his vanity and 
heresy. For he also had with him a certain Anastasios, a presbyter from Antioch, to whom he showed great favour for 
being of  the  same persuasion,  a most outrageous fellow who blasphemed in church against the ever­ virgin 
Mother of God. Eusebios, bishop of Dorylaion, was the first to denounce him. By acting in this manner he 
[Nestorios] stirred up considerable uproar and disturbance.
In the same year in Ephesos there occurred the remarkable miracle of the seven holy youths who arose after 184 
years.












138
 

 

Theodosios, 24th year Vararanes, 17th year Celestinus, 8th year Nestorios, 2nd year Praylios, 14th year Cyril, 17th 
year
John, 9th year
   In this year, when Cyril, the bishop of Alexandria, learned of Nestorios' blasphemies, he wrote begging him and 
admonishing him	89 like a brother to refrain from his distorted views and to cling to the correct faith. But 
Nestorios replied in a manner that was both insulting and blasphemous. Cyril then wrote to Celestinus, the Pope of 
Rome, on the matter of Nestorios and made known to him the blasphemous statements that Nestorios had written 
him. Then Celestinus wrote to Nestorios giving him a time-limit of ten days to cease from his blasphemies and 
repent: but if he remained in his heresy he would no longer be a priest admitted to communion. Likewise Celestinus 
and Cyril wrote to John, archbishop of Antioch, and to Juvenal of Jerusalem concerning Nestorios and his heresy. 
John wrote to Nestorios, counselling him to abandon his heresy and reminding him of the saying of the apostle: 'God 
sent forth his Son made of a woman'.  Nestorios, realizing that the patriarchs would not be content to pass this over 
in silence since the churches were so disturbed, persuaded the emperor to send a rescript to Cyril which censured 
him severely, but though he thought he would strike Cyril through this, he actually stirred him  all the more. 
Aroused, Cyril wrote to the emperor and to his sisters about the correct faith and Nestorios' heresy, while at the same 
time requesting that an ecumenical synod be held to examine canonically the question of Nestorios. Then the 
emperor Theodosios wrote to all the bishops within his jurisdiction to present themselves at Ephesos without delay 
after Easter, ordaining that 'he who is not present at the synod in Ephesos on the day of holy Pentecost will have no 
excuse before God or us'. Celestinus of Rome asked Cyril of Alexandria to take his place at the synod, as he was 
unable to be present because of the toilsome navigation  in winter.



139
 

 
Theodosios, 25th year Vararanes, 18th year Celestinus, 9th year Nestorios, 3rd year Praylios, 15th year Cyril, 18th 
year
John, 10th year
  In this year the Third holy and ecumenical Synod of 200 fathers was assembled in Ephesos. Accordingly, when all 
the [other] bishops
90   had come, John of Antioch and the eastern bishops had not observed the appointed time limit and on the 
sixteenth day after the appointed one, when John had not yet come, Nestorios arrived with a good deal of posturing. 
And on 20 June the synod was convened, with Nestorios, Cyril, and Juvenal presiding, Cyril taking the place of the 
bishop of Rome. While they all discoursed about God, Nestorios spoke with great boastfulness, 'I would not name as 
divine him who is two or three months old. And for this reason I am innocent of your blood. From this moment I am 
not coming back to you.' Having made his statement, he left with six bishops who followed his doctrine. Cyril's 
party gathered on the next day and sent three bishops to summon him, but he refused. Likewise, when he was 
summoned a second and third and a fourth time, he did not come, but ordered that the emissaries be insulted and 
dishonoured. Then the holy and ecumenical synod, having received its emissaries, the bishops who had been 
insulted and dishonoured, decided against him and stripped him of all priestly rank. They arranged for his deposition










140
 

to be announced to him in person. Three days after this was accomplished, John, bishop of Antioch, arrived 
accompanied by twenty-six bishops who, having learned of the deposition of Nestorios, seceded from the holy 
synod; they assembled with Nestorios and deposed, as they believed, Cyril and Memnon of Ephesos. Theodoretos, 
indeed, thinking to inveigh against Cyril, having misinterpreted there the twelve chapters,3 vomited up Nestorios' 
poison. But the sainted Cyril stood up bravely and gave a defence of those same chapters, interpreting them and 
revealing the treasure of church doctrine contained in them and making clear to everyone his own pious intentions. 
When John of Antioch had been called by the Holy Synod and had refused to present himself for the third time, he 
received the verdict that he and his companions 91        were to be deprived from all ecclesiastical communion, 
until such time as they repented and admitted their own error. The Holy Synod also decided that the statements made 
illegally and uncanonically by the easterners to insult the most holy leaders of the Church, Cyril and Memnon, 
should have no validity whatever.
And so when all these matters had been reported to the emperor Theodosios in a memorandum, the bishops from 
both factions were ordered to come to Constantinople, and having come, those from the holy synod were victorious 
with God's co-operation. On the confirmation of Nestorios' deposition Maximianus was ordained bishop of 
Constantinople, being a presbyter of the same church. The easterners took Nestorios with them to the East. In the 
fourth year of Nestorios' deposition, John the bishop of Antioch, possessed with the fear of God, and seeing that 
many of the leading people in Antioch were being led astray by Nestorios, wrote to the emperor asking him to expel 
Nestorios from the East. The emperor banished Nestorios to the Oasis, and sent instructions to Cyril and John to be 
united without delay in order to free the churches from every dis­ cord. John yielded to the decree and wrote to Cyril 
[a statement of] his faith, accepting the confession of the fathers at Nicaea and that of the 150 at Constantinople and 
the actions taken at Ephesos. The holy Cyril welcomed this and wrote a letter to John and the eastern bishops, which 
began: 'Let the heavens be pleased and the earth rejoice.' When both of them had agreed on the same confession, 
their respective churches were united in peace and harmony.
At this time the God bearing Nonnos acted as shepherd for the church of the Edessenes. He consecrated to God the 
foremost mime of Antioch and offered her to Christ as the holy Pelagia instead of her being Margarito the prostitute. 
This holy man, rejoicing at the harmony of the saints, wrote to the archbishop John words of advice
141
 



and teaching, among which was this statement, 'Cleanse the church,
92	0 man of God, from the Nestorian tares and their terrible [effects]'. Divine justice followed the impious and 
blasphemous Nestorios in exile. After suffering from putrefaction in all his limbs, and above all in his abominable 
tongue, he was destroyed by death, thus anticipating his recall from the Oasis [by being summoned] to another 
place.

AM 5926 [AD 433/4)
Year of the divine Incarnation 426
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (42 years), 26th year Vararanes, emperor of the Persians (20 years), 19th year 
Celestinus, bishop of Rome (10 years), 10th year Maximianus, bishop of Constantinople  (2 years), 1st year 
Praylios, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 16th year
Cyril, bishop of Alexandria  (32 years), 19th year John, bishop of Antioch (18 years), 11th year
















142
 
_ 
In this year Valentinian, the son of Galla Placidia and Constantius, came from Rome to Constantinople and took for 
his wife Eudoxia, the daughter of the emperor Theodosios and Eudokia, and returned to Rome.
In the same year Hesychios, the presbyter of Jerusalem, died. And the blessed Melane, the granddaughter of the 
elder Melane, died in Jerusalem after a life spent in spiritual training and [the pursuit of] perfection.


(AM 5927, AD 434/5)
Theodosios, 27th year Vararanes, 20th year
Xystos, bishop of Rome (8 years), 1st year 
Maximianus, 2nd year Praylios, 17th year Cyril, 20th year
John, 12th year
  In this year the emperor Theodosios sent his wife Eudokia to Jerusalem to offer hymns of thanksgiving to God. 
She bestowed very many gifts on the churches and, after venerating the holy Cross and the Holy Places, she returned  
to the palace.














143
 



[AM 5928, AD 435/6)
Theodosios, 28th year
Isdigerdes, emperor of the Persians (17 years), 1st year 
Xystos, 2nd year
Proklos, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 1st year Praylios, 18th year
Cyril, 21st year John, I3th year
In this year the theatre of Alexandria collapsed with the loss of 572 men during the all night festival of the Niloa.


(AM 5929, AD 436/7]
Theodosios, 29th year Isdigerdes, 2nd year Xystos, 3rd year Proklos, 2nd year Praylios, 19th year Cyril, 22nd year
John, 14th year

(AM  5930, AD 437/8]
Theodosios, 30th year Isdigerdes, 3rd year Xystos, 4th year Proklos, 3rd year Praylios, 20th year Cyril, 23rd year
John, 15th year
In this year, Proklos, the most holy bishop of Constantinople, after
93	seeking permission from the emperor Theodosios, transferred the relics of John Chrysostom from Komana to 
the capital. In the following year, after 33 years, he took them on a public procession escorted by the emperor and 
the blessed Pulcheria, and placed them in the church of the Apostles, thus uniting those who had been separated 
following his deposition from the Church.
In the time of the same holy Proklos, severe earthquakes 144 


occurred in Constantinople lasting for four months so that the Byzantines fled in fear from the city to the Campus, as 
it is called, and they spent the days in procession with the bishop in supplication to God. On one occasion while the 
earth was swaying and all the people were chanting earnestly, 'Lord, have mercy,' suddenly at about the third hour, 
before the eyes of all, a youth happened to be lifted by divine power into the air and to hear a divine voice ordering 
him to tell the bishop and the people to say the following [words] in their litany, 'God, who art holy [and] strong, 
holy [and] immortal, have mercy upon us,' and to add nothing extra. The sainted Proklos accepted this decree and 
ordered the people to sing in that way and immediately the earthquake stopped. The blessed Pulcheria and her 
brother, marvelling exceedingly at this miracle, issued a decree that this divine hymn was to be sung throughout the 
whole world. And from that time all the churches have accepted the custom of singing it to God each day.


















145
 



AM 5931 [AD 438/9)
Year of the divine Incarnation 431 		     Theodosios, emperor of the Romans ( 43 years),  31st year 
Isdigerdes,  emperor of  the Persians (17 years),  4th year Xystos, bishop of Rome (8 years), 5th year	           
Proklos, bishop  of  Constantinople  (12 years),  4th year Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem ( 38 years),  1st year	   
Cyril, bishop of Alexandria  ( 32 years), 24th year 	    John, bishop of Antioch (18 years),  15th year
In this year Valentinian was not only unable to preserve Britain, Gaul, and Spain, but even lost in addition western 
Libya, called the land of the Africans, in the following manner. There were two generals, Aetios and Boniface, 
whom Theodosios sent to Rome at 94 Valentinian's request. When Boniface obtained the governorship of western 
Libya, Aetios, in envy, brought an accusation against him of plotting a rebellion and aiming to gain control of Libya. 
He alleged these things to Valentinian's mother Placidia, but also wrote to Boniface as follows, If you are 
summoned back, do not come. For you have been slandered and the emperors intend to capture you by trickery. 
After Boniface received this, he did not come when summoned for he trusted Aetios as a true friend. The emperors 
thereupon accepted Aetios as being loyal.
		There were at that time numerous extremely large Gothic tribes living beyond the Danube in the 
districts to the far north. Of these, four are particularly worthy of note, namely the Goths, the Visigoths, the Gepids, 
and the Vandals, who differ from one another in name alone and speak the same dialect. They all subscribe to the 
Arian heresy.  After crossing the Danube in the time of Arkadios and Honorius, they were settled on Roman 
territory. The Gepids, from whom the Lombards and Avars were later derived, settled in the area around Singidunum 
and Sermium. The Visigoths, after destroying Rome under Alaric, went to Gaul and gained control of territory there. 
The Goths first took Pannonia and later, in the 19th year of the rule of Theodosios the younger and with his 
permission, they settled in the region of Thrace and, after staying in Thrace for 58 years, they gained control over 
the Western Empire under the leadership of Theuderich, patrician and consul, Zeno having allowed them to do so. 
The Vandals, in association with the Alans and the Germans, who are now called Franks, after      95    crossing 
the Rhine under the leadership of Godigisklos, settled  in  Spain, which is the first country in Europe this side of 
the western Ocean. Boniface, in fear of the Roman emperors, crossed from Libya to
146
 
Spain and came to the Vandals. Discovering that Godigisklos had died and that the rule had passed to his sons 
Gontharis and Gizerich, he roused them by promising that he would divide western Libya into three parts on 
condition that each (including himself) would rule a third part and that they would combine in defence against any 
enemy whatever. Under these terms, the Vandals crossed the strait and settled in Libya from the Ocean as far as 
Tripolis beside Cyrene. The Visigoths, setting out from Gaul also gained control of Spain. Some Roman senators, 
who were friends of Boniface, reported to Placidia that Aetios' accusation was false, even showing her Aetios' letter 
to Boniface, which Boniface had sent them. Placidia was astonished but did not harm Aetios. She did, however, send 
a missive of encouragement to Boniface, supported by oaths. On Gontharis' death Gizerich became sole ruler of the 
Vandals. Boniface, having received the assurance, campaigned against the Vandals, with a large army that had come 
to help him from Rome and Byzantium under the command of Aspar. War against Gizerich broke out and the Roman 
army was defeated. And so Boniface came to Rome with Aspar, dispelled the suspicion, and revealed the truth; but 
Africa came under the control of the Vandals. It was then that Marcian, who later became emperor but was at the 
time a soldier serving Aspar, was captured alive by Gizerich.
 












147
 

 
(AM 5932, AD 439/40]
Theodosios, 32nd year Isdigerdes, 5th year Xystos, 6th year Proklos, 5th year Juvenal, 2nd year
 



































148
 

Cyril, 25th year John, 17th year
   In this year the holy martyr Euphemia was translated to Alexandria on the sixth day before the kalends of 
October. 

\

(AM 59331 AD 440/1)
Theodosios, 33rd year Isdigerdes, 6th year Xystos, 7th year Proklos, 6th year Juvenal, 3rd year Cyril, 26th year
John, 18th year
   In this year the Kantharos, which is a bath in Alexandria, was completed.
Some monks who came to Constantinople caused the emperor much annoyance by bringing a posthumous charge of 
heresy against Theodore who had been bishop of Mopsuestia. The emperor instructed Proklos to write to the bishops 
of the East to make an inquiry and, if they were right, to anathematize Theodore. John of Antioch, with the support 
of his synod, replied to Proklos and the emperor, testifying to Theodore's orthodoxy.



 

 
Theodosios, 34th year Isdigerdes, 7th year Xystos, 8th year Proklos, 7th year Juvenal, 4th year
 












149
 



Cyril, 27th year
Domnus, bishop of Antioch (8 years), 1st year
In this year the earth was shaken and groaned on the fifteenth day before the kalends of May.

(AM 5935, AD 442/3)
Theodosios, 35th year Isdigerdes, 8th year
Leo, bishop of Rome (21 years), 1st year 
Proklos, 8th year Juvenal, 5th year Cyril, 28th year Domnus, 2nd year
   In this year Charmosynos, the augustalis in Alexandria, was struck in the face at the Kynegion and died on the 1st 
of the month of Epiphi.

(AM 5936, AD 443/4)
Theodosios, 36th year Isdigerdes, 9th year Leo, 2nd year
Proklos, 9th year Juvenal, 6th year Cyril, 29th year Domnus, 3rd year













150
 


   In this year the emperor Theodosios made priest the praepositus and patrician Antiochos, who was also his 
bajulus, and confiscated his house on the grounds that he had disparaged the emperor and dis­ regarded him. For this 
reason he introduced a law that no eunuch was to rise to the rank of patrician.

AM 5937 (AD 444/5]
Year of the divine Incarnation 437
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (42 years), 37th year Isdigerdes, emperor of the Persians (17 years), 10th year 
Leo, bishop of Rome (21 years), 3rd year
Proklos, bishop of Constantinople  (12 years), 10th year Juvenal, bishop of Alexandria (38 years), 7th year
Cyril, bishop of Alexandria  (32 years), 30th year Domnus, bishop of Antioch (8 years), 4th year
   In this year Kyros, the City prefect and praetorian prefect, a very learned and competent man, who had both built 
the city walls  and	97 restored all Constantinople, was acclaimed by the Byzantines in the Hippodrome, in the 
presence and hearing of the emperor [as follows], 'Constantine built [the city], Kyros restored it.' The emperor 
became angry that they said this about him and, alleging that Kyros was a pagan, he removed him from office and 
confiscated his property. Kyros fled to the church and himself became a priest. The emperor, feeling compassion 
towards him, ordered that he be made bishop of Smyrna in Asia. He arrived just before Christmas and the people of 
Smyrna, suspecting that he was a pagan, wanted to kill him. But when he had entered the church and been invited to 
address the congregation, he said, 'Brother men, may the birth of God our Saviour






151
 



Jesus Christ be honoured in silence since the Word of God was conceived in the holy Virgin by hearing alone. Glory 
be to Him for ever and ever. Amen.' The congregation rejoiced and praised him and he served piously as their 
bishop. 

(AM 5938, AD 445/6]
Theodosios, 38th year Isdigerdes, 11th year Leo, 4th year   Proklos, 11th year Juvenal, 8th year Cyril, 3 1st year 
Domnus, 5th year
   In this year another John, called the Vandal, rebelled against Valentinian in Rome. Theodosios sent out a force 
under the generals Aspar and Ardabourios, who fought John in battle and defeated him. John, after receiving a 
pledge, gave himself up alive, and they brought him to the emperor Theodosios and arranged for him to be treated 
honourably. But Chrysaphios, a eunuch who had great influence in the palace, killed him by treachery. However, 
justice caught up with Chrysaphios not much later.













152

 


[AM 5939, AD 446/7]

Theodosios, 39th year Isdigerdes, 12th year Leo, 5th year
Proklos, 12th year Juvenal, 9th year Cyril, 32nd year Domnus, 6th year
  In this year Cyril of Alexandria and Proklos of Constantinople died piously. Proklos was succeeded by Flavian, the 
presbyter and sacristan of the church of Constantinople, a most holy and virtuous man. But Cyril was succeeded by 
the impious Dioskoros, who was in no respect a teacher but wild and savage, especially towards Cyril's family, so 
that he even converted their house into a church though it rose to a great height and had three storeys at the top.

AM  5940 [AD 447/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 440
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (42 years), 4oth year Isdigerdes, emperor of the Persians (I? years), 13th year 
Leo, bishop of Rome (21 years), 6th year
Flavian, bishop of Constantinople (2 years), 1st year Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem (38 years), 10th year Dioskoros, 
bishop of Alexandria (5 years), 1st year Domnus, bishop of Antioch (8 years), 7th year
   In this year Chrysaphios, a eunuch who exercised power over the palace and the emperor Theodosios and who 
was jealous of Flavian for his ordination, suggested to the emperor, who was quite innocent and was staying at 
Chalcedon, that he should instruct the patriarch
153
 



to send him eulogiai on the occasion of his appointment. So Flavian sent him pure loaves by way of eulogiai. But 
Chrysaphios returned these, declaring that the emperor wanted eulogiai of gold. The bishop stated in reply that he 
did not have any money to send, 'unless I use some of the sacred vessels'. On this account there was a considerable 
feeling of grievance between them, though Pulcheria was not informed of it.
Such were the events in Constantinople. But in Alexandria Dioskoros had from the very beginning set about ruining 
Cyril's family and plundering their property and deposed without cause his nephew Athanasios who was a presbyter, 
and entirely confiscated his goods. He behaved in this way out of opposition to Cyril's orthodoxy, being himself a 
heretic and holding the views of Origen from his earliest youth. And he was at loggerheads with Flavian because 
Flavian had provided some small support for the family of the blessed Cyril.
Chrysaphios, being impious and not suffering to see harmony among the churches, made it his purpose to disturb 
them and did all he could to expel Flavian from his bishopric, in the hope that a certain Eutyches, an archimandrite 
of his own persuasion, would be elected to the bishop's office. Having failed in this, since Pulcheria was in control 
of affairs, he first approached Eudokia, who lacked experience, and roused her to envy against her own mother and 
suggested to her that she abuse Pulcheria to the emperor with a view to obtaining the praepositus, whom Pulcheria 
necessarily kept since
99 she controlled the management of affairs. The emperor, vexed by his wife, summoned her and said, 'Do not let 
this trouble you, for it is impossible for you to have a praepositus, nor am I going to set aside my sister who manages 
affairs with excellence, skill and piety.' Unsuccessful in this ploy, Chrysaphios followed with another and suggested 
to Eudokia that she trouble the emperor into ordering the patriarch to appoint Pulcheria a deacon since she had 
chosen a life of virginity. And so Eudokia, by troubling the emperor all the more, got the better of his innocence. 
When the blessed Flavian was ordered by the emperor to do this, he was greatly distressed as he foresaw the 
difficulties that would spring from such action. So he both made a promise to the emperor and also wrote to 
Pulcheria advising her not to receive him into her presence 'so that I am not compelled,' he added 'to do anything 
that will annoy you.' But she, realizing from the letter what was being plotted, handed over the praepositus to 
Eudokia and departed to the Hebdomon where she took her rest. As a result of this, the emperor and Eudokia were 
extremely annoyed with Flavian for revealing the secret.
154
 

So with Pulcheria staying quiet and Eudokia directing the Empire, something like this happened A certain Paulinus, 
the magister, was greatly loved by Eudokia for being very educated and handsome and she used to meet him 
frequently in private. And so on Christmas Day, someone brought to the emperor a large and marvellous apple. After 
admiring it, the emperor sent it to Eudokia who sent it to Paulinus. Two days later Paulinus sent it to the emperor. 
Recognizing it, the emperor hid it, went away, and asked the Augusta, 'By my salvation, where is the apple I sent 
you?' She replied 'By your salvation, I have eaten it.' Then, moved to anger, he ordered that the apple be brought in 
and that Paulinus be exiled to Cappadocia and executed there.
Eusebios the scholasticus, who was mentioned earlier as the first person to tackle Nestorios, after being promoted to 
the bishopric of Dorylaion, happened to be conversing about the faith with the archimandrite Eutyches, and 
discovered that his views were not correct. After admonishing him at length, he was unable to help him. So Eusebios 
raised the matter with bishop Flavian who, after gathering a synod of 40 bishops summoned Eutyches, and after 
examining
him according to the whole procedure of the ecclesiastical canons,	r oo found that he was a deceitful heretic and 
so deposed him. But
when Chrysaphios, his sympathizer, who controlled the palace, learned about this, he was fired to anger against 
Flavian all the more, and announced to Dioskoros of Alexandria that he would cooperate with him in all his wishes 
if he would concur in accusations against Flavian and Eusebios and fight on behalf of Eutyches. He stirred up the 
Augusta Eudokia over this reminding her, to Flavian's detriment, of her painful experiences regarding Pulcheria. 
And the pair of them pressed the emperor into decreeing that a second synod be assembled in Ephesos, and they 
allowed Dioskoros to be the president of the synod, sending a large army to assist him.

 
155
 
,,.. 


 

Theodosios, 41st year Isdigerdes, 14th year Leo, 7th year
Flavian, 2nd year Juvenal, 11th year Dioskoros, 2nd year Domnus, 8th year
  In this year, at the command of the emperor Theodosios, the Robber Synod was illegally convened in Ephesos so 
that the affair of Flavian and Eutyches would be judged by the impious Dioskoros, on the recommendation of 
Chrysaphios the eunuch, surnamed Tzoumas, who had prevailed upon the emperor's simplicity. When they had all 
gathered at Ephesos, Dioskoros as president did not allow any other secretary to be present in the synod but caused 
his own secretaries alone to write down the proceedings. And so, after
156
 


an inquiry had taken place, Eutyches was required to elucidate his own views, to which he replied by saying, 'I 
confess that before the union our Lord consisted of two natures, but after the union I confess one nature.' Then 
Dioskoros said, 'We also all agree with this.' The delegates of Pope Leo of Rome, on seeing Dioskoros' haste and 
because he did not allow the pope's letter to Flavian to be read, nor indeed his letter to the synod (which were 
disregarded), fled and went back to Rome. Dioskoros restored the priesthood to Eutyches and readily deposed 
Eusebios of Dorylaion and Flavian of Constantinople. Flavian, in addition to being deposed, was driven out with 
kicks and blows from Dioskoros' people and on the third day departed from this life.
On the next day under pressure from the soldiers and their swords	101 the bishops were compelled to sign. But 
on regaining his senses, Domnus, bishop of Antioch, who had signed under pressure, opposed Dioskoros and the 
rulers by denouncing what had been done, describing the synod as impious and seeking to withdraw his signature. 
When he learned of this, Pope Leo approached the emperor Valentinian and the empresses and in tears begged that 
letters be sent to the emperor Theodosios to correct the illegal and uncanonical actions taken in Ephesos. Theodosios 
replied to his daughter Eudoxia as follows: 'I wish to make this known to your Sweetness that Flavian was banished 
by the holy decision of the churches for being responsible for many disturbances.
Dioskoros deposed Theodoret, Ibas, Andrew, Domnus of Antioch, and other eastern bishops in their absence.
The emperor Theodosios was easily swayed, carried by every wind, so that he often signed papers unread. Among 
these even the most wise Pulcheria inserted unread a donation ceding his wife Eudokia to slavery, which he signed 
and for which he was severely reproached by Pulcheria.
In the same year Gizerich, who had become powerful among the Vandal people, described himself as king after 
gaining control of land, sea, and many islands which had been tributary to the Romans. This grieved Theodosios and 
so he sent out eleven hundred cargo ships with a Roman army commanded by the generals Areobindos, Ansilas, 
Inobindos, Arintheos, and Germanus. Gizerich was struck with fear when this force moored in Sicily and he sent an 
embassy to Theodosios to discuss a treaty.

157
 



 [AM 5942, AD 449/50]
Theodosios, 42nd year Isdigerdes, 15th year Leo, 8th year
Anatolios, bishop of Constantinople (9 years), 1st year Juvenal, 12th year 				      Dioskoros, 
3rd year
Maximus, bishop of Antioch (3 years), 1st year
In this year Theodosios, after collecting his thoughts, realized that he had been deceived by Chrysaphios' villainy, 
and grieved over the unholy treatment of Flavian and the injustice to the other bishops. In great anger he first 
banished Chrysaphios to an island and then inveighed severely against Eudokia, naming her as responsible for all
102 the evils and in particular for driving Pulcheria from the palace and also reproaching her over the affair of 
Paulinus. She in despair asked to be sent away to Jerusalem. So, taking with her the presbyter Severus and John the 
deacon, she went to Jerusalem. When the emperor learned that these men had frequented her in Constantinople and 
were with her in Jerusalem, and that she bestowed on them many gifts, he sent orders that they should be beheaded. 
Then the emperor, after earnestly beseeching the blessed Pulcheria, brought her back to the palace. She immediately 
sent to Ephesos to bring back the relics of the holy Flavian. Accompanied by an escort, she carried these along the 
Mesê and buried them in the
158
 

Holy Apostles. Then she built the church of the Copper market for the holy Mother of God, which had previously 
been a Jewish synagogue.
While the fleet was waiting in Sicily, as we have mentioned, for the arrival of Gizerich's ambassadors and the 
emperor's commands, Attila, in the meantime, overran Thrace. He was the son of Moundios, a Scythian, a brave and 
arrogant man who, after getting rid of his elder brother Bdellas, became sole ruler of the empire of the Scythians 
whom they call Huns. It was on his account above all that Theodosios made a treaty with Gizerich and recalled the 
fleet from Sicily. He sent out Aspar with his force together with Areobindos and Argagisklos against Attila, who had 
already subdued Ratiaria, Naissos, Philippoupolis, Arkadioupolis, Constantia, and very many other towns, and had 
collected vast amounts of booty and many prisoners. After the generals had been thoroughly defeated in the battles, 
Attila advanced to both seas, to that of Pontos and to that which flows by Kallipolis and Sestos, enslaving every city 
and   103 fort except Adrianople and Herakleia, which was once called Peirinthos, so that he came as far as the fort 
of Athyras itself. So Theodosios was compelled to send an embassy to Attila and to provide 6,ooo pounds of gold to 
secure his retreat, and also to agree to pay an annual tribute of 1,000 pounds of gold for him to remain at peace.
A short while after the Roman army had returned from the war against Attila, the emperor Theodosios died on 20 
July in the 3rd indiction. The blessed Pulcheria, before the emperor's death was known to anyone, summoned 
Marcian, a man distinguished by his prudence and dignity and now old and very capable, and said to him, 'Since the 
emperor has died, and I have chosen you from the whole Senate for being a virtuous man, give me your word that 
you will guard my virginity, which I have dedicated to God, and I shall proclaim you emperor.' When he had 
promised this, she summoned the patriarch and the Senate and proclaimed him emperor of the Romans.
159
 



AM 5943 [AD 450/1]
Year of the divine Incarnation 443
Marcian, emperor of the Romans (7 years), 1st year Isdigerdes, emperor of the Persians (17 years), 16th year Leo, 
bishop of Rome (21 years), 9th year
Anatolios, bishop of Constantinople (9 years), 2nd year Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem (38 years), 13th year 
Dioskoros, bishop of Alexandria (5 years), 4th year Maximus, bishop of Antioch (4 years), 2nd year
   In this year the pious Marcian, appointed sole ruler by divine decree, recalled all those in exile. The blessed 
Pulcheria handed over the universally detested eunuch Chrysaphios to Jordanes. The latter was the son of that John 
who, after usurping power in Rome, had then surrendered to Ardabourios and Aspar, come to Byzantium, and been 
treated with honour, but who had then been treacherously killed by Chrysaphios. Jordanes took Chrysaphios and 
killed him.
104  It is fitting to indicate that from the beginning the choice of God fell on Marcian as emperor. In earlier times 
when the Persian War was undertaken, Marcian, being a common soldier, set out from Greece with his detachment 
against the Persians, and, when he had
160
 


come to Lycia, was struck with an illness. So he was left behind in the city of Sidema, and while he was tarrying 
there he made friends with two brothers, called Julius and Tatianus, who took him to their own house and looked 
after him. Once, when they went out hunting they took him with them, and growing tired they went to sleep about 
midday. Tatianus woke up first and saw Marcian asleep in the sun, and an enormous eagle that had come over him 
and, spreading out its wings, provided shade for him. After gazing at this, Tatianus woke his brother and showed him 
the miracle. Having marvelled for a long time at the bird's kindly service, they woke Marcian up and said, 'If you are 
to become emperor, what will you grant us?' He said, 'Who am I that this should happen to me?' They asked him a 
second time and Marcian said, 'If this should happen through God, I shall appoint you senators.' Then they gave him 
two hundred nomismata, saying, 'Go to Constantinople and remember us when God elevates you.'
So he departed and joined the generals Ardabourios and Aspar, who where Arians, and spent fifteen years with them 
and having become their domesticus, he went with Aspar to Africa to do battle against Gizerich and was captured in 
battle by Gizerich. So Gizerich, having locked up the prisoners in his own palace, was observing them from an 
upper storey, and about midday, he leaned out and saw Marcian asleep, while an eagle had come and, spreading its 
wings, shaded him. Seeing this, Gizerich concluded that it happened through divine dispensation. And so he 
summoned the man and, when he learned that he was the domesticus of Aspar, he knew that he was going to be 
elevated to the Empire. Gizerich decided not to kill him, since he calculated that no one is able to hinder the will of 
God, so he demanded an oath from Marcian that if it was pleasing 							 
105 to God to make him emperor, he would never fight the Vandals. And so Marcian was set free unharmed and 
came to Byzantium. A little while later, on the death of Theodosios, he was proclaimed emperor, as we have already 
mentioned. He was a kind man to all his subjects. I
Attila rose up against the emperors because Valentinian at Rome did not give his own sister Honoria in marriage to 
him. He advanced as far as the city of Aurelia engaged with the Roman general Aetios in battle, and was defeated, 
losing most of his forces at the river Ligys,  and retreated in shame.
Marcian, recalling the favour that had been shown him in Lycia, summoned Tatianus and Julius and proclaimed 
them senators. He made Tatianus City prefect and appointed Julius governor of Lycia.
161
 



The blessed Pulcheria erected many different churches [dedicated] to Christ and notably, at the beginning of the 
reign of the pious Marcian, the church at Blachernai  to our mistress worthy of all praise, the Mother of God.
Leo, the blessed Pope of Rome, wrote to Marcian to ask that the presumptuous actions of Dioskoros and Eutyches at 
Ephesos against the holy Flavian be examined by an ecumenical synod. So the emperor ordered all the bishops to 
assemble.

162
 

(AM 59441 AD 451/2)
Marcian, 2nd year Isdigerdes, 17th year Leo, 10th year Anatolios, 3rd year Juvenal, 14th year Dioskoros, 5th year 
Maximus, 3rd year
   In this year the Fourth Holy Synod was held in Chalcedon in October of the 5th indiction, a year and two months 
after the proclamation of Marcian [as emperor]. When all the bishops and the Senate had gathered in the martyrium 
of St Euphemia, they examined the actions taken in the 1st indiction against Eutyches and Dioskoros' innovations at 
Ephesus. When Dioskoros was accused of these, he sought refuge by claiming ignorance of what had taken place, 
but being unable to escape conviction because of the acts themselves, he became perplexed and the truth was 
exposed. Since 106      he had no defence, he was disgraced. Those who had sat with him at the Robber Synod 
charged him with the violence and constraint they had suffered at his hands and, after seeking pardon from the 
synod, they were admitted. Among them was Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem. Dioskoros, now in confusion and unable 
to put up any defence, no longer dared to show himself at the synod. Thereupon the synod, with the emperor 
Marcian and the Senate also present, decided against Dioskoros and Eutyches and deposed them. The emperor 
banished Dioskoros to Gangra and praised the synod with these words, 'I give the greatest thanks to the God of us all 
that, with the discord removed, we have all come together to one and the same confession.' And after rewarding the 
630 fathers  he dismissed them in peace, each to his own seat. Proterios was ordained bishop of Alexandria in place 
of Dioskoros.

 


AM 5945 [AD 452/3)
Year of the divine Incarnation 445
Marcian, emperor of the Romans (? years), 3rd year Perozes, emperor of the Persians (24 years), 1st year    Leo, 
bishop of Rome (2I years), 11th year
Anatolios, bishop of Constantinople (9 years), 4th year Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem (38 years), 15th year Proterios, 
bishop of Alexandria (6 years), 1st year Maximus, bishop of Antioch (4 years), 4th year
   In this year the blessed and pious Pulcheria died in the Lord. She had done many good deeds and left all her 
possessions to the poor. Marcian readily distributed these large amounts. She herself had founded numerous houses 
of prayer, poorhouses, hostels for travellers, and burial places for strangers, among which was the church of the holy 
martyr Laurentius.
After Dioskoros' banishment and Proterios' promotion, the sup­ porters of Dioskoros and Eutyches created an 
enormous amount of trouble and even threatened to stop the transport of corn. When Marcian learned of this, he 
ordered that the Egyptian corn be brought
107  down the Nile to Pelusium instead of Alexandria, and so be shipped to the capital. As a result the Alexandrians, 
who were starving, asked Proterios to supplicate the emperor on their behalf and so they stopped making trouble.
In this year the baths of Diocletian in Alexandria were restored. Also Attila burned the city of Aquileia.
164
 


In the same year a certain monk called Theodosios, a destructive man, went in haste to Jerusalem after the Synod of 
Chalcedon, and after learning that the Augusta Eudokia was favourable to Dioskoros, who had been deposed by the 
synod, he began to bawl out that the synod had distorted the correct faith and quite convinced the Augusta and the 
monks. By means of murder he seized the bishop's throne in a barbaric manner, and with the Augusta's men as his 
assistants, he ordained bishops in every city, while the [other] bishops were still at the synod. When Severianus, 
bishop of Skythopolis, would not submit to his heresy, Theodosios drove him out of the city and murdered him and 
then incited a persecution of those who refused to be in communion with him. Many he tortured, others he punished 
with confiscation, and he had the houses of yet others burned down, so that the city seemed to have been captured by 
the barbarians. He slaughtered Athanasios, deacon of the church of the Holy Resurrection, for reproaching and 
chiding him for his godlessness, and after parading that man's holy body round the city, he threw it to the dogs. 
Domnus, bishop of Antioch, fled into the desert and so, too, did Juvenal of Jerusalem. After the corrupter 
Theodosios had held the see of Jerusalem for twenty months, the emperor Marcian was informed of it and ordered 
his arrest. Theodosios went as a fugitive to Mount Sinai. With him and those ordained by him out of the way, 
Juvenal regained his own see once more.
 


 

Marcian, 4th year Perozes, 2nd year
 














ro8
 
Leo, 12th year Anatolios, 5th year Juvenal, 6th year Proterios, 2nd year
Basil, bishop of Antioch (2 years), 1st year
   In this year Valentinian, the emperor in Rome, suspicious of the power of the patrician and general Aetios, 
treacherously killed him, with one of the eunuchs, Herakleios, as his accomplice. Attila got ready to make war on 
Marcian for refusing to pay him the tribute as appointed by Theodosios. But in the meantime he fell in love with a 
beautiful girl, and while celebrating his marriage to her, he became thoroughly intoxicated and was overwhelmed by 
sleep; after discharging a copious amount of blood through his nose and mouth, he ended his life. His sons inherited 
his great power but were killed quarrelling with each other. The Romans of the East, however, enjoyed complete 
peace, justice, and happiness during Marcian's rule. Those were indeed golden years because of the emperor's 
goodness, and tranquility  prevailed  in all affairs.

[AM 5 9471 AD 454/5)
Marcian, 5th year Perozes, 3rd year Leo, 13th year Anatolios, 6th year Juvenal, 17th year Proterios, 3rd year Basil, 
2nd year
  In this year Valentinian, the emperor in Rome, though supporting the correct doctrines of the Church, committed 
many transgressions in his private life. For though having a very beautiful wife, Eudoxia, the daughter of the 
emperor Theodosios, he cohabited with other women in demonic fashion and continually conversed even with those 
who practised magic. So he was given over to a most shameful
166
 


death. For one of the patricians in Rome, Maximus, the grandson and namesake of the Maximus who had been a 
usurper in the times of Theodosios the elder, entered the palace, murdered Valentinian, raped Eudoxia, and gained 
control of the Empire. For where anyone sins, there will he be punished. Eudoxia, distressed by these events and 
calculating that she would get no aid from Byzantium now that both her father Theodosios and Pulcheria had died, 
invited Gizerich to Rome, exhorting him to free her from Maximus' tyranny. So Gizerich sailed to Rome with a large 
fleet and Maximus fled in fear. His associates killed him after he had ruled one year. Gizerich, with
no one to stop him, entered Rome on the third day after the murder 109 of Maximus, and taking all the money and 
the adornments of the
city, he loaded them on his ships, among them the solid gold and bejewelled treasures of the Church and the Jewish 
vessels which Vespasian's son Titus had brought to Rome after the capture of Jerusalem. Having also taken the 
empress Eudoxia and her daughters, he sailed back to Africa. He married Eudokia to his eldest son, Onorich, but 
after learning that Placidia had a husband, the patrician Olybrius, he held her in custody with her mother Eudoxia.
After learning of Maximus' death, Majorinus ruled two years, and after him Avitus held Rome's Empire for two 
years, and after him Severus three years. After these men there was no emperor, but Rekimer controlled affairs, 
commanding the army and invested with great power. 
In the same year Eudokia died in Jerusalem, having made many donations to the churches. 


 [AM 5948, AD 455/6]
Marcian, 6th year Perozes, 4th year Leo, 14th year Anatolios, 7th year Juvenal, 18th year Proterios, 4th year
Martyrios, bishop of Antioch (13 years), 1st year 
   In this year Ravenna was burned, and a few days later the patrician Ramitos was killed at Classe. Twenty nine 
days later Amitos was defeated by Remikos and went to the city of Placentia in Gaul.


 

 
Marcian, 7th year Perozes, 5th year Leo, 15th year
 




168
 


Anatolios, 8th year Juvenal, 19th year Proterios, 5th year Martyrios, 2nd year
   In this year the emperor Marcian died on the day before the kalends of May. Leo the elder became emperor. In 
the same year in Alexandria Trajan's bath was restored and also the great basilica at the Stoicheion. Marcian was 
very pious and God fearing. He used to go out on foot to the litanies in the Campus, performing many good works 
for the needy. As a result of seeing him the patriarch Anatolios no longer performed the litany while being carried in 
a sedan-chair, as was customary, but on foot.
   In this year Timothy the Cat, having had recourse to magic, went
round at night to the cells of the monks, calling each of them by	1IO name, and when there was a reply, he 
would say, 'I am an angel and
I have been sent to tell everyone to refrain from communion with Proterios and the party of Chalcedon, and to 
appoint Timothy the Cat bishop of Alexandria.'
In the same year Eudoxia, the daughter of the emperor Theodosios and wife of Valentinian the third, returned from 
Africa with one of her daughters, Placidia, the wife of Olybrius. For Eudokia was married to Gizerich's son Onorich 
and did not return.

AM 5950 (AD 457/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 450
Leo, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 1st year Perozes, emperor of the Persians (24 years), 6th year Leo, bishop of 
Rome (21 years), 16th year
Anatolios, bishop of Constantinople (9 years), 9th year Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem (38 years), 20th year Proterios, 
bishop of Alexandria (6 years), 6th year Martyrios, bishop of Antioch (13 years), 3rd year
169
 



  In this year Leo became emperor, a Thracian by race and a tribune in rank, and was crowned by the patriarch 
Anatolios in February of the 10th indiction.
   In the same year almost the whole city of Antioch collapsed in a terrible earthquake.	.
A giraffe, a buffalo, and other beasts came to Alexandria. At the same time as these, Timothy, known as the Cat, was 
causing trouble in the city of Alexandria. For having bribed a throng of disorderly men, he seized the throne of 
Alexandria like a usurper, and, though he had been suspended, was ordained by two men who were themselves 
under suspension. From this source grew all the snares in Alexandria. For while all the priests of the whole world 
had accepted the definition of the Synod at Chalcedon, this abominable man, in an uncontrollable frenzy, insulted it 
and ordained bishops, though not himself ordained, and performed baptisms, though not even being a presbyter. The 
blessed Proterios, perceiving the plot that was being hatched against him by the Cat, gave place unto wrath and 
sought refuge in the sacred baptistery on the first day of Easter. But
111  the forerunner of the Antichrist, respecting neither the holy day, nor the revered places, sent out men to kill the 
innocent high priest and six others who were with him. Dragging his corpse with ropes, they hauled it from the holy 
font and paraded it through the whole city insulting it without pity. Finally they burned it in a fire and scattered the 
ashes in the air.
In the same year the relics of St Anastasia   were brought from Sermium and deposited in her church in the portico 
of Domninus. Timothy the Cat, after discovering some unpublished writings of Cyril the Great, falsified them in 
many places, as Peter the presbyter of Alexandria records. 

170
 


 

Leo, 2nd year Perozes, 7th year Leo, 17th year
Gennadios, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 1st year Juvenal, 2 1st year
Timothy the Cat, who held Alexandria like a robber for 2 years, 1st year
Martyrios, 4th year
 In this year the emperor Leo, having learned of the unjust death of Proterios and the illegal promotion of the Cat, 
after sending [instructions] cut out the tongue of Caesarius and banished both for having taken part together in the 
murder of Proterios. But he did not punish the unholy Timothy, saying it was the prerogative of bishops to make a 
decision about him.
In the same year, too, Zeno was married to Areadne, the daughter of Leo.
171
 

[AM 5 952, AD 45 9/60)
Leo, 3rd year Perozes, 8th year Leo, 18th year Gennadios, 2nd year Juvenal, 22nd year
Timothy the Cat, 2nd year Martyrios, 5th year
   In this year the emperor sent a letter to the bishops of each province, asking every one of them to write him his 
personal view on whether they approved the definitions made at Chalcedon and what they felt about the ordination 
of the Cat. Among these [he wrote] to St Symeon the Stylite, Baradatos the monk, and Jacob the miracle worker, 
calling them to witness that, as they would have to render an account to the God of all, so should they make a 
judgement about the matters in dispute. They, being of one accord,
112   unanimously ratified the synod of Chalcedon as being holy and accepted the definitions set out by it. They 
unanimously condemned Timothy as a murderer and a heretic. Gennadios, too, was eager for the emperor to avenge 
Timothy's audacity, while the Arian Aspar sought to counteract him. The pious emperor banished the Cat to Gangra, 
where his teacher Dioskoros had previously [been banished]. There, too, the Cat began to hold rival assemblies and
172
 

cause disturbances, on learning of which the emperor re-exiled him to Cherson. Another Timothy, surnamed the 
White (the same as Salophakialos), an orthodox and good man who was loved by all, was ordained bishop of 
Alexandria in his place. 


 

Leo, 4th year Perozes, 9th year Leo, 19th year Gennadios, 3rd year Juvenal, 23rd year
Timothy surnamed the White, bishop of Alexandria (15 years), 1st year Martyrios, 6th year
In this year Juvenal, the most holy bishop of Jerusalem, died and Anastasios was ordained in his place. In the same 
year there also died Symeon the great Stylite, the one of the mandra, who was the first to practise that kind of 
asceticism and who became a worker of miracles.


173
 


 

Leo, 5th year Perozes, 10th year Leo, 20th year Gennadios, 4th year Juvenal, 24th year Timothy, 2nd year Martyrios, 
7th year
   In this year a great fire occurred in Constantinople on 2 September of the 15th indiction. It began in the Neorion 
and spread as far as the church of St Thomas in the district of Amantius. Marcianus, the oikonomos, went up on to 
the roof-tiles of St Anastasia holding the gospel and preserved that church from harm by his prayers and tears.



 

 
Leo, 6th year Perozes, 11th year Leo, 21st year Gennadios, 5th year Juvenal, 25th year
 






174
 

Timothy, 3rd year Martyrios, 8th year
In this year Majorinus was killed by the patrician Remikios at Tartion, and Severus, also called Serpentius, was 
elevated to be emperor on the nones of July.
In the same year when a painter dared to depict the Saviour in the likeness of Zeus, his hand became withered. When 
he had confessed, Gennadios cured him by his prayer.  Some historians say that the form with short curly hair is 
more appropriate for the Saviour. While Gennadios was praying one night inside the sanctuary, he is said to have 
seen an apparition of a demon whom he rebuked and then heard him cry out that he would yield as long as 
Gennadios was alive, but after his death would surely rule the Church. Terrified, 				 113 
Gennadios addressed many pleas to God on this account.
In the same year Studius built the church of the Forerunner and established in it monks from the monastery of the 
Sleepless Ones. The praepositus Gratissimus built the church of St Kyriakos outside the Golden Gate and became a 
monk in it.


175
 

 


Year of the divine Incarnation 456
Leo, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 7th year Perozes, emperor of the Persians (24 years), I2th year Hilary, 
bishop of Rome ( 6 years), 1st year 
Gennadios, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 6th year Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem (38 years), 26th year 
Timothy, bishop of Alexandria (15 years), 4th year Martyrios, bishop of Antioch (13 years), 9th year
  In this year the emperor Leo made his son-in-law Zeno magister militum per Orientem, and Basiliskos, the brother 
of the Augusta Verina, magister militum per Thracias. Zeno went to Antioch and met the bishop there, the holy 
Martyrios. Peter the Fuller, a presbyter of the church of the martyr Bassa at Chalcedon, was in Zeno's entourage. 
After persuading Zeno to cooperate with him, he hired some people of the Apolinarian persuasion and aroused 
numberless disturbances against the creed and bishop Martyrios. He anathematized those who denied that God had 
been crucified, and having split the people of Antioch, he added to the thrice-holy hymn the phrase 'who was 
crucified for us', which from that time right up to the present has continued to be said by the Theopaschites. 
Martyrios went to the emperor Leo and was received with much honour by the efforts of Gennadios, bishop of 
Constantinople. After returning to Antioch and finding the people in revolt and Zeno lending them aid, he resigned 
from his bishopric in front of the congregation, saying, 'With the clergy insubordinate, the people disobedient, and 
the Church polluted, I resign, keeping for myself the dignity of the priesthood.' When he had gone, Peter the Fuller 
leaped upon the throne of Antioch, immediately ordaining John
114 bishop of Apameia, a man previously deposed. When Gennadios learned of this, he referred it all to the emperor, 
who ordered Peter the Fuller to be banished. When Peter heard this, he escaped banishment by flight. By a common 
vote a certain Julian was appointed bishop of Antioch.
In the same year on the 5th day before the ides of May the prophet Elisha was translated to Alexandria and placed in 
the monastery of Paul the Leper. For he cured a leper, made a leper, and was placed in [the church] of the Leper.
 


 

Leo, 8th year Perozes, I3th year Hilary, 2nd year Gennadios, 7th year Juvenal, 27th year Timothy, 5th year 
Martyrios, 10th year
In this year the Tetrastoon and sanctuary of St John were built in Alexandria. Also the public bath Heptabizos was 
restored to the city. In these years Daniel the Stylite ascended his column at Anaplous, a marvellous man. John, a 
man of consular rank surnamed Vincomalus, having implored the holy Bassianos, became a monk with him. He 
continued to go on processions in the palace as one of the senators and when he left [the palace] he was escorted as a 
consular as far as the monastery of Bassianos. But once inside the monastery, he immediately put on the monastic 
goat's hair cloak and fulfilled his duties in the kitchen and the stable and in other work of this kind.
In the same year Anthimos and Timokles, the composers of troparia, became famous.
177
 


In the same year following an embassy from the Senate in Rome, the emperor Leo sent out Anthimios, the son in 
law of the previous emperor Marcian, as emperor in Rome, a most Christian man who piously ruled the Empire for 
six years.


 

Leo, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 9th year Perozes, emperor of the Persians (24 years), 14th year Hilary, 
bishop of Rome (6 years), 3rd year
Gennadios, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 8th year Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem (38 years), 28th year 
Timothy, bishop of Alexandria (15 years), 6th year Martyrios, bishop of Antioch (13 years), 11th year
115		In this year a sign appeared in the sky, a cloud in the shape of a trumpet, for forty days each evening.


 

Leo, 10th year Perozes, 15th year Hilary, 4th year Gennadios, 9th year
 

Juvenal, 29th year Timothy, 7th year Martyrios, 12th year
In this year Alexandria enlisted three thousand men and the great pool was built in the district of John together with 
two baths named Health and Healing. The river at Alexandria was dug from Chersaion to Kopreon.



 

Leo, 11th year Perozes, 16th year Hilary, 5th year Gennadios, 10th year Juvenal, 30th year Timothy, 8th year 
Martyrios, 13th year
   In this year the quaestor Isokasios, an Antiochene and a philosopher, was denounced to the emperor for being a 
pagan. The emperor ordered him to be examined before the praetorian prefect in Constantinople. When he was 
brought into the Zeuxippos with his hands tied behind his back, the prefect Pusaeus said to him, 'Do you see, 
Isokasios, in what state you have placed yourself?' He replied, 'I see, and I am not dismayed. For being human, I 
have fallen into human misfortune. But bring judgement on me just as you used to judge with me.' On hearing this, 
the crowd acclaimed the emperor. When the emperor was informed, he rejoiced and released Isokasios back to his 
own country.

179
 
 

Leo, 12th year Perozes, 17th year Hilary, 6th year Gennadios, 11th year Juvenal, 31st year Timothy, 9th year
Julian, bishop of Antioch (6 years), 1st year
   In this year the emperor Leo equipped and sent out a big fleet against Gizerich who ruled the Africans. For after 
the death of Marcian, Gizerich had committed many terrible things against the territories under the Empire of the 
Romans, plundering, taking many prisoners, and destroying the cities. And so the emperor, moved by zeal, gathered 
100,000 ships from the entire eastern sea, filled them with armies and weapons, and sent them against Gizerich. 
Indeed they say that he spent 130,000 lbs. of gold on this expedition. As general and commander of the fleet he 
appointed the Augusta Verina's brother Basiliskos, who had already obtained the
1116 distinction of a consulship and had frequently defeated the Scythians in Thrace. Joined by a considerable force 
from the West, he met Gizerich frequently in sea battles and consigned his ships to the depths and could have 
conquered Carthage. But later, enticed by gifts and vast amounts of money from Gizerich, he gave in and was 
voluntarily defeated, as Persikos the Thracian records.
Some say that Aspar and Ardabourios, being Arians, and for this reason unable to reach the imperial dignity, made 
Leo emperor inasmuch as he was their curator, while expecting to manage the realm themselves. But since as 
emperor he did not consent to this, they strove to subvert matters that were well managed by him, and they agreed to 
give the Empire to Basiliskos if he betrayed the emperor's fleet and army to Gizerich, who was an Arian and of their 
own persuasion. They say that because of this Basiliskos committed treachery.
Next Gizerich hit on this device: he filled ships of war with some combustible material, and waiting for the night 
when the Romans were asleep and off their guard, he let them go from the land against the Roman fleet, with the 
wind blowing away from the shore. They completely burned many of the [Roman] ships, though others,
180
 

escaping the danger, returned to Sicily. Then indeed Basiliskos' treachery was proved and became evident to all 
members of the armament.
In the same year Aspar's son Patricius, whom the emperor Leo had made Caesar for having won over Aspar from 
Arianism and for being devoted to the emperor, arrived in Alexandria amid great pomp at the time when the Koreion 
bath was repaired. 

181
 

 

Leo, 13th year Perozes, 18th year
Simplicius, bishop of Rome (14 years), 1st year 
Gennadios, 12th year Juvenal, 32nd year Timothy, 10th year Julian, 2nd year
In this year the emperor Leo sent Zeno, the magister militum per Orientem and his own son in law, to Thrace for 
some military purpose, ordering the transfer to him of some of his own troops as reinforcements. These troops, at 
Aspar's instigation, were close to killing Zeno, had he not anticipated the plot by escaping safely to Serdica, a city in 
Thrace. As a result of this, Aspar became suspect to the emperor Leo.


 

Leo, I4th year Perozes, 19th year Simplicius, 2nd year Gennadios, 13th year Juvenal, 33rd year Timothy, 11th year 
Julian, 3rd year
   In this year the emperor Leo sent against Gizerich Herakleios of Edessa, the son of the ex consul Florus, and the 
Isaurian Marsos, both energetic men, with an army from Egypt, the Thebaid, and the desert. After taking the Vandals 
by surprise, they regained Tripolis and many other cities of Libya and harassed Gizerich more than the fleet of 
Basiliskos had done, so that he prepared to send an embassy to the emperor Leo about peace. This was agreed to by 
Leo, who at that time needed Basiliskos, Herakleios, and Marsos for a plot against Aspar. For Aspar, being suspected 
by the emperor, as I have
182
 


mentioned, and being invested with great power, was treacherously murdered by the emperor shortly afterwards, 
along with his sons, Ardabourios and Patricius, whom the emperor had earlier appointed Caesar in order to keep 
Aspar's goodwill.

 

Year of the divine Incarnation 464
Leo, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 15th year Perozes, emperor of the Persians (24 years), 20th year Simplicius, 
bishop of Rome (14 years), 3rd year Akakios, bishop of Constantinople (17years), 1st year Juvenal, bishop of 
Jerusalem (38 years), 34th year Timothy, bishop of Alexandria (15 years), 12th year Julian, bishop of Antioch (6 
years), 4th year
In this year, after Aspar and his sons Ardabourios and Patricius had been put to death by Leo, Aspar's bodyguard 
Ostrys and Triarios' son Theuderich, who was Aspar's brother in law, attacked the City with an army to avenge the 
murdered men. And had not Basiliskos, who on his return from Sicily, got back before them, and had not Zeno, 
coming from Chalcedon, where he was awaiting the execution of Aspar, come to the aid of the City and scattered the 
insurgents, there would have been much upheaval in the state. Aspar's youngest son Armenarich,  who had been 
beguiled, on Zeno's advice escaped and was sent to Isauria where he was set up as an in law of
Zeno's illegitimate son. After Leo's death he returned to Byzantium118 and lived happily to the end.
In Italy the general Recimer, whom I have mentioned previously, the brother in law of Anthemios who had ruled 
Rome piously,  rose
183
 

up against his own relative. During the war which gripped the country, the forces of the emperor suffered from 
hunger to such an extent that they ate even animal skins and other strange food, and the emperor Anthemios was 
killed in the seventh year of his rule. Thereupon Leo, because of the tumult that still existed in Rome, sent out 
Placidia's husband Olybrius to Rome and proclaimed him sole ruler. Recimer survived the killing of Anthemios for 
only three months before dying from disease, and Olybrius died at the same time from a bodily ailment. After their 
deaths, Majorinus succeeded to the Empire, a man who was sound of mind and experienced in war. Finding that the 
cities had been devastated by Gizerich, he invaded Liana and, after reaching Liguria, showed himself a terrible foe 
to the Vandals. As he was about to gain victory, he died in the meantime, overtaken by the disease of dysentery. The 
general crossed over and got to Patmos safely. While Gizerich's entourage was caught up in these events, the young 
Eudokia, the granddaughter of Theodosios, who had been in Africa for sixteen years with her husband Onorich and 
had borne him a son, Ilderich, vexed with her husband for being an Arian, found an opportunity to flee and came to 
Jerusalem, and after venerating the revered sites and embracing the tomb of her grandmother (Eudokia), spent a few 
days in the Holy City and died in peace, bequeathing everything she had to the church of the holy Resurrection. She 
committed Bourkos and his children to the archbishop of Jerusalem for being her faithful helper in her escape from 
her husband, the Arian Onorich. 
 
Year of the divine Incarnation 465
Leo, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 16th year Perozes, emperor of the Persians (24 years), 21st year Simplicius, 
bishop of Rome (14 years), 4th year Akakios, bishop of Constantinople (17 years), 2nd year Juvenal, bishop of 
Jerusalem (38 years), 35th year Timothy, bishop of Alexandria (15 years), 13th year Julian, bishop of Antioch (6 
years), 5th year
   In this year the emperor Leo crowned and proclaimed emperor his own grandson, Leo, the son of his daughter 
Areadne and Zeno.
After the deaths of Olybrius, Recimer, and Majorinus, Glykerios was proclaimed emperor of Italy, a man who was 
by no means worthless, and whom, after a rule of five months, the Dalmatian Nepotianus expelled from office and 
became emperor himself for a short time, but was expelled by a certain Orestes whose son, Romulus surnamed 
Augustulus, succeeded and ruled for just two years, being established as sole ruler of the Empire in Italy 1303 years 
after the reign of Romulus, the founder of Rome. And it is worthy of note that the Empire of the West which had 
flourished from the time of Romulus ended again with a Romulus after so many years. For next Odoacer, a Goth by 
race but brought up in
185
 
119
 



Italy, subdued the Empire with a barbarian army. He, assuming for himself the title of 'Rex' and filling every office 
according to the ancestral law of the Romans, held power for ten years. He lived at Ravenna, a prosperous and 
beautiful city in Italy by the sea.


 

Leo, 17th year Perozes, 22nd year Simplicius, 5th year Akakios, 3rd year Juvenal, 36th year Timothy, 14th year 
Julian, 6th year
In this year dust came down from clouds that seemed to be burn­ ing, so that everyone thought it was raining fire. 
Everybody per­ formed litanies in fear. The dust settled on roofs to the depth of one palm. Everybody said that it was 
fire and that it was put out and became dust through God's mercy.
120         In the same year the emperor Leo fell sick in Byzantium and died in January of the 12th indiction, 
leaving Leo, the son of Zeno and Areadne, whom he had previously appointed emperor, though he was still an 
infant. In February Leo crowned his father in the Kathisma of the Hippodrome, with Verina and Areadne assisting 
him. After ruling for only ten months jointly with his father Zeno, the young Leo died from an illness and Zeno ruled 
alone for seventeen years and two months, including the twenty months of Basiliskos' usurpation. Zeno administered 
the Empire harmfully; in the beginning  the  Saracens  overran  Mesopotamia and the Huns
186
 
Thrace, causing severe damage to the state, while the emperor spent his time on wicked pleasures and unjust deeds.



Year of the divine Incarnation 467
Zeno, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 1st year Perozes, emperor of the Persians (24 years), 23rd year Simplicius, 
bishop of Rome (14 years), 6th year Akakios, bishop of Constantinople (17 years), 4th year Juvenal, bishop of 
Jerusalem (38 years), 37th year Timothy, bishop of Alexandria (15 years), 15th year
Peter, 39th bishop of Antioch for the first time (3 years), 1st year
   In this year Leo the younger, after ruling for only ten months with his father Zeno, and having appeared on 
procession as consul, died, and Zeno ruled the Empire alone. Basiliskos, the brother of Zeno's mother in law Verina, 
while staying in Herakleia in Thrace, rebelled against Zeno with the help of Verina and some members of the Senate. 
In fear of him, Zeno, with his wife Areadne and a considerable amount of money, fled to a stronghold in Isauria 
called Ourba, and from there he moved to Sbide, where he remained two years with his wife Areadne while being 
besieged by Illos and Trokoundos, who were then supporting Basiliskos.
Basiliskos was proclaimed emperor in the Campus and appointed	121 his son Marcus Caesar and crowned his 
wife Zenodia Augusta. He immediately prepared to campaign against the faith, being especially urged to do so by 
Zenodia. He recalled Timothy the Cat by decree, and also Peter the Fuller, who was being hidden in the monastery 
of the Sleepless Ones, while the other enemies of the Holy Synod of
187
 



Chalcedon spoke openly against the truth. The Cat assembled a disorderly mob of Alexandrians resident in 
Byzantium and, riding on an ass, took them on a litany from the palace to the church. But when he had come to [the 
building] known as the Octagon, he fell off and crushed his foot and had to go back shamefaced. Basiliskos sent him 
out to Alexandria with decrees against the synod, and likewise Peter the Fuller to Antioch, strengthening both to act 
against the truth. When Timothy Salophakialos, bishop of Alexandria, learned that Timothy the Cat had arrived, he 
withdrew to the monasteries of Kanopos, where he had formerly lived the life of an ascetic. Although the Cat 
wronged many, he was unable to harm Timothy because the latter was loved by everyone. When the Cat entered 
Alexandria, his supporters shouted out this disgraceful thing, 'You have fed on your enemies, pope!, and he shouted 
back, 'Yes, indeed I have fed on them.' This impious fellow even anathematized the synod of Chalcedon. Julian, 
bishop of Antioch, died from grief at what had happened. Peter the Fuller seized his throne and spread anathemas 
and discord, so that there were murders and rapine because of the addition to the Trishagion. By a general decree 
Basiliskos annulled the Synod of Chalcedon and ordered Akakios of Constantinople to do the same. But the entire 
city, including women and children, gathered in the church against Basiliskos and prevented this. Akakios, clad in 
black, draped the throne and the altar in black. Daniel the Great came down from his column and, full of holy zeal, 
joined for a time Akakios and the congregation in church. 
122		Perozes campaigned against the Nephthalite Huns and having routed them went in pursuit. But they, 
making their escape in small groups along the narrow passes in the mountains, retreating to right and left, got 
themselves behind the Persians and blockaded them through their lack of precaution. In these straits Perozes begged 
for peace. The emperor of the Nephthalites would not do this before Perozes fell down before him, made obeisance 
and gave assurances on oath that he would never again campaign against the Nephthalites. Perozes, constrained by 
force, was compelled to do this and retreated in great dishonour. But unable to bear the shame, he campaigned 
against them once more, disregarding his oaths.

188
 


AM 5968 (AD 475/6)
Year of the divine Incarnation 468
Zeno, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 2nd year Perozes, emperor of the Persians (24 years), 24th year 
Simplicius, bishop of Rome (14 years), 7th year Akakios, bishop of Constantinople (17 years), 5th year Juvenal, 
bishop of Jerusalem (38 years), 38th year
Timothy the Cat, bishop of Alexandria (2 years), 1st year Peter the Fuller, bishop of Antioch ( 3 years), 2nd year
   In this year, when the clergy and monks of Constantinople were fighting on behalf of the holy Synod of 
Chalcedon, Akakios, fearing the crowd, pretended to agree with them and for this reason spoke against Basiliskos 
and Zeno from the ambo. When Basiliskos learned of this, he was afraid of the people's wrath and departed from the 
City, ordering that no member of the Senate should meet Akakios; for the people were about to set fire to the City. 
Daniel, the wonderful stylite, taking the monks and the zealots among the people, led them out to Basiliskos and 
addressed him with consider­ able licence but Basiliskos took no notice of them.
In the same year Perozes went on campaign once more against the White Huns, known as Nephthalites, and perished 
with his entire army. For the Nephthalites dug a deep ditch, placed reeds over     123 it, covered it with earth, and 
then stayed behind it. They sent out a few men to meet the Persians and then turned in flight, crossed the narrow 
passes one by one and fled together with all the others. The Persians, not suspecting any danger, rashly pursued them 
and they
189
 



all, including Perozes and his sons, fell into  the  pit  and perished. When Perozes perceived the danger, he 
removed the huge, brilliantly white pearl he had in his right ear (it was exceedingly costly) and threw it away so that 
no one after him would wear it, since it was most remarkable; no other emperor had ever before possessed anything 
like it. So Perozes was destroyed with all his army. Those who had not campaigned with Perozes chose Kabades as 
emperor, the younger son of Perozes.  The barbarians ruled the Persians for two years to collect their tribute.
Kabades, rashly using his office, decreed that women were to be had in common. So the Persians deprived him of 
office, bound him, and put him in prison. They made Perozes' brother Blases, also called Valas, their emperor 
because there were no other sons of Perozes. Kabades' wife looked after him in prison. The governor of the prison 
fell in love with her because of her beauty. Kabades encouraged his wife to give in to the man, in case it enabled him 
to escape from the fort. This she did and was then able to visit and tend Kabades unhindered. A friend of Kabades, 
named Seoses, sent a message to Kabades through his wife that he had horses and men ready in a certain village. 
When night came on, Kabades persuaded his wife to give him her clothes and for her to put on his clothes and 
remain in the prison. So Kabades got out of prison, escaped the notice of the guards, and, when he was some 
distance from the prison, mounted a horse and went with Seoses to the Nephthalite Huns. Their emperor gave him 
his daughter in marriage and having also given him a large army sent him with it against the Persians. The guards, 
seeing the
[24 woman dressed in Kabades' clothes, supposed for several days that Kabades was in prison. Kabades invaded 
Persia with his army of Huns and gained control of the empire without difficulty. He blinded Blases, also called 
Valas, put him in prison, and kept the empire securely for himself, for he was shrewd and energetic. After that he 
ruled eleven years.
 

 

Zeno, 3rd year
Valas, emperor of the Persians (4 years), 1st year 
Simplicius, 8th year Akakios, 6th year
Anastasios, bishop of Jerusalem (18 years), 1st year Timothy the Cat, 2nd year
Peter the Fuller, 3rd year
In this year Illos and Trokoundos, who were besieging Zeno, seeing that Basiliskos was not fulfilling the promises 
made to them, and that the Senate, annoyed with Basiliskos' rule because of the depravity of his ways and his folly, 
was writing to them, made friends with Zeno and, taking him, were making their way back to the capital. When 
Basiliskos learned of this, he dispatched his nephew Harmatios, who was magister militum per Thracias, with his 
entire army and the contingents of Constantinople against Zeno, making him swear on his holy baptism not to betray 
him. Harmatios met Zeno at Nicaea in Bithynia and so terrified him that the latter was on the point of retreating with 
his entire force of Isaurians. But Harmatios, too, was so blinded by gifts from Zeno and by the promise of 
appointment as perpetual magister militum and that his son, Basiliskos, would be made Caesar and preside by his 
side, that
191
 



he returned with Zeno against Basiliskos. So Zeno and Areadne reached the capital and were received by the people 
and the Senate.
Basiliskos went into the church, placed his imperial crown on the holy table, and sought refuge in the baptistery with 
his wife, the heretic Zenodia. Zeno arrived, went into the church, and then entered the palace. After sending 
messages to the church, he took Basiliskos, giving him his word that he would not behead him or his children. He 
then sent him to Koukousos in Cappadocia and
125 ordered that he be locked up in a tower with his wife and children and be destroyed by starvation. Some say that 
he was killed while he was being led away. Zeno immediately held the chariot races, where he promoted Harmatios' 
son Basiliskos to be Caesar in accordance with his promises. Basiliskos sat beside the emperor on his throne and 
honoured the charioteers with the emperor. But Zeno thought to himself, 'As Harmatios did not keep faith with 
Basiliskos though on oath, neither will he do so with me. And if the Caesar, who is his son, grows to manhood, he 
will rise up against me. For my part, I   have fulfilled my promise to him and made him magister militum and his 
son Caesar.' He gave orders for him to be executed for perjury. He was killed on the kochlias of the palace as he was 
going up into the Hippodrome, and his son, the Caesar, was ordained a lector. For Areadne saved him since he was 
her [great] nephew. Later he served very well as bishop of Kyzikos.
Zeno abandoned Peter the Fuller because of his support for Basiliskos. He was deposed by a vote of the eastern 
synod and John was appointed in his place, but he was expelled after three months and after him Stephen, a devout 
man, was appointed bishop of Antioch. Peter, who was being banished to Pityoussa, deceived those who were taking 
him and sought refuge at St Theodore of Euchaita. Timothy the Cat died at this juncture and was replaced by Peter 
Mangos, a wicked man and an enemy of truth, who had previously been suspended. He was ordained by a single 
bishop who was himself suspended. With divine zeal the monks attacked him and drove him out after he had held 
the episcopate as a robber for only thirty-six days, and they restored Timothy Salophakialos again to his throne with 
due honour.
 

(AM 5970, AD 477/8)
Zeno, 4th year Valas, 2nd year Simplicius, 9th year Akakios, 7th year
Anastasios, 2nd year
Timothy Salophakialos, bishop of Alexandria again ( 4 years), 1st year
Stephen, bishop of Antioch (3 years), 1st year
In this year there was a terrifying earthquake in Constantinople on 25 September of the 1st indiction, and many 
churches, houses, and porticoes collapsed to the ground and countless numbers of people 126       were buried. 
The globe of the statue in the Forum also fell and so did the statue of Theodosios the elder, the one on the column of 
the Tauros, and also the inner walls for a considerable distance. The earthquake lasted a long time, so that the city 
began to stink.
Stephen, who had been promoted by a common vote to [the see of] Antioch, was accused before Zeno as a Nestorian 
by the supporters of Peter the Fuller. But the eastern synod, which gathered at Laodikeia at the  emperor's  
command,  reinstated  him  to his  throne as guiltless.
In the same year Theuderich, also called Strabos, the son of Triarios, the nephew of the wife of Aspar (who had been 
destroyed by Leo), rose up against Zeno with a mass of barbarians, since he had
193
 



been a friend of Basiliskos and had been made a general by him. After Zeno's return Theuderich went forth to 
Thrace and, starting from there, plundered the area round Byzantium as far as the mouth of the Pontos. Next, when 
he was on the point of being betrayed by his kinsmen, he perceived the treachery, returned and destroyed those who 
had been plotting this. He died by falling unexpectedly on a spear that was standing in front of his tent, while he was 
mounting his horse.




 

Year of the divine Incarnation 471
Zeno, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 5th year Valas, emperor of the Persians (4 years), 3rd year Simplicius, 
bishop of Rome (14 years), 14th year Akakios, bishop of Constantinople (I? years), 8th year Anastasios, bishop of 
Jerusalem (18 years), 3rd year Timothy, bishop of Alexandria (4 years), 2nd year Stephen, bishop of Antioch (3 
years), 2nd year
194
 

   In this year Marcian, the son of Anthemios who had been emperor in Rome, the husband of Leontia, who was 
both the daughter of Verina and sister of the empress Areadne, rose in revolt against the emperor Zeno in Byzantium, 
on the grounds that his wife Leontia had been born after Leo became emperor:1 for Areadne had been born before 
he became emperor. A violent battle took place between Zeno
and Marcian in which Marcian won by strength of arms and drove	127 everyone on Zeno's side into a prison in 
the palace, and, with his brothers Romulus and Prokopios fighting with him, he almost 
captured the imperial power. But he paid insufficient attention to the position he had achieved by stopping for dinner 
and sleep. During the night he was deprived of many of his allies by Illos the magister, who won them over by 
bribes, and on the following day his forces were so inferior that he sought refuge in the church of the Apostles, and 
was then ordained presbyter by Akakios on Zeno's instructions and banished to the castle of Papyrios in Cappadocia. 
His brothers, Prokopios and Romulus, were arrested by Illos while they were bathing at the Zeuxippos during the 
night, but escaped and reached Rome.

 

(AM  5972, AD  479/80]
Zeno, 6th year Valas, 4th year
Simplicius, 11th year Akakios, 9th year Anastasios, 4th year Timothy, 3rd year Stephen, 3rd year
 









195
 



   In this year the magister Illos plotted with the emperor Zeno to expel Zeno's mother in law Verina from the City. 
Having used a trick to bring her to Chalcedon, shortly afterwards he sent her away to the castle of Papyrios to live 
with Marcian and her daughter Leontia. She wrote to her daughter Areadne begging to be recalled from banishment. 
The empress begged Zeno, who said to her, 'Ask the patrician Illos about her.' She sent for him and asked him amid 
tears. But he was not persuaded, saying, 'You are seeking to make another emperor instead of your husband.' 
Enraged by this, Areadne told the emperor, 'Either Illos stays in the palace or I do.' The emperor replied, 'I want you. 
If you can do anything to him, do it.' So she arranged to have him murdered, and ordered the cubicularius Urbicius 
to persuade someone to kill Illos. As he was ascending the kochlias of the Hippodrome, a scholarius named 
Spanikios under instructions aimed his sword at Illos' head. But the magister's spatharios, who was attending him, 
took the blow on his arm; even
128 so, the tip of the sword cut off Illos right ear. Zeno had the scholarius executed, assuring the magister Illos that 
he knew nothing about the event, the truth being that he had not overruled the plot. When he was cured of the 
wound, Illos used to wear a cap. He asked the emperor to send him to the East so that he could enjoy a change of air, 
because he was weak from the wound. The emperor, wishing to satisfy him, appointed him magister militum per 
Orientem and gave him full authority even to appoint duces. Illos took with him the patrician Leontios, a Syrian by 
race, an excellent man both for his education and his military experience, who was commander of the army in 
Thrace, and with him Marsos and the senator Pamprepios, who had been accused of magic. Having collected a very 
large force, he went to Antioch in Syria and made his rebellion clear.
196
 


 

Zeno, 7th year
Kabades, emperor of the Persians (11 years), 1st year
Simplicius, 12th year Akakios,  10th year Anastasios, 5th year Timothy, 4th year
Another Stephen bishop of Antioch, the one who was thrown into the river Orontes ( 1year), 1st year
   In this year, on the death of Stephen, bishop of Antioch, another Stephen was ordained in his place at the 
command of the emperor Zeno. The enemies of the faith, out of goodwill towards the Fuller, killed him with 
sharpened reeds in the font of the holy martyr Barlaam, and then, arming their folly with anger, threw his body into 
the river Orantes. Because of the outrages committed against Stephen, Zeno ordered Akakios of Constantinople to 
ordain a bishop of Antioch and he ordained Kalandion. But the Antiochenes in their ignorance had ordained John, 
surnamed Kodonatos, whom Kalandion transferred to Tyre, the foremost see under Antioch.
In the same year Timothy Salophakialos died in Alexandria and John the Tabennesiote was ordained, a holy man and 
a champion of the correct doctrine, who had been a presbyter and oikonomos of the Church at Alexandria.
The patrician Illos with Leontios and the others went to the castle of Papyrios and, after taking the Augusta Verina to 
Tarsos in Cilicia, he made her crown Leontios the patrician as emperor outside 129 
the city at St Peter's. The empress Verina wrote an imperial rescript to the people of Antioch in Syria to accept 
Leontios as emperor and also sent rescripts to all the governors of the East, Egypt, and Libya to accept Leontios as 
emperor and not to oppose him.

197
 




 

Zeno, 8th year Kabades, 2nd year Simplicius, r13th year Akakios, 11th year Anastasios, 6th year
John the Tabennesiote, bishop of Alexandria (3 years), 1st year Kalandion, bishop of Antioch (4 years), 1st year
   In this year the rescripts of the empress Verina arrived and were read, of which the content was as follows. 'The 
Augusta Verina to our governors and Christ-loving people, greetings. You know that the Empire is ours and that after 
the death of my husband Leo, we appointed as emperor Traskalissaios, subsequently called Zeno, so that our 
dominion would be improved. But now seeing that the State is being carried backwards as a result of his insatiate 
desire, we have decided that it was necessary to crown for you a Christian emperor embellished by piety and justice, 
so that he may save the affairs of the State and that wars be stilled. We have crowned the most pious Leontios as 
emperor of the Romans, who will reward you all with his providence.' Those who received this acclaimed Leontios 
as emperor. 

198
 

 


Zeno, 9th year Kabades, 3rd year Simplicius, 14th year Akakios, 12th year Anastasios, 7th year
John the Tabennesiote, 2nd year Kalandion, 2nd year
   In this year Illos and Leontios freed Longinus, the brother of Zeno, and his mother from the fortress. Verina, who 
had fallen ill there, died and, after some time, was brought to Byzantium by Areadne.


 

Zeno, 10th year Kabades, 4th year
Felix, bishop of Rome (9 years), 1st year 
Akakios, 13th year Anastasios, 8th year
John the Tabennesiote, 3rd year Kalandion, 3rd year
   In this year Leontios arrived in Antioch as emperor on 27 June of the 7th indiction, and he appointed Lilianus as 
praetorian prefect. Then he left and made war on Chalkis, his native city. Zeno dispatched John the Scythian with a 
very large force against Illos 130     and Leontios by land and sea. A violent battle took place in which Illos and 
Leontios were defeated and fled to the  fortress  of  Papyrios, along with the magister Pamprepios, who was said 
to be a magician. Then John captured Illos' brother Trokoundos as he was departing to make a levy among 
barbarians and cut off his head. Illos and Leontios, deceived by the magister Pamprepios, the magician, spent four 
years under siege, waiting for him. When they learned of his death, they beheaded Pamprepios as an impostor and 
threw  him down from the walls.
 In the same year the supporters of Peter Mongos persuaded Zeno by means of money and quackery to expel John 
the Tabennesiote,
199
 



the bishop of Alexandria, on the grounds that he had been ordained against his wish, and to bring Peter Mangos back 
again to Alexandria from Euchaita. Then Zeno made the Henotikon, dictated, as some say, by Akakios of 
Constantinople and distributed it everywhere. Zeno ordered Peter Mangos before his return to Alexandria to be in 
communion with Simplicius of Rome and Akakios. Akakios wrote to the Alexandrians to receive Peter Mangos and 
to expel John. When John heard of Peter's coming, although the clergy together with the people were begging him 
not to go as they were ready to die on his behalf, he wisely departed without a fuss, perceiving Peter's intended 
misdeeds.
200
 



Year of the divine Incarnation 477
Zeno, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 11th year 
Kabades, emperor of the Persians (11 years), 5th year Felix, 
bishop of Rome (9 years), 2nd year
Akakios, bishop of Constantinople (17 years), 14th year 
Anastasios, bishop of Jerusalem (18 years), 9th year Peter 
Mangos, bishop of Alexandria (6 years), 1st year Kalandion, 
bishop of Antioch (4 years), 4th year
 In this year Theuderich, son of Valamer, [was summoned by Zeno to 
Byzantium]. Theuderich had a great reputation among both the 131 
barbarians and the Romans for bravery and providence and was not 
without a share of education. For he had once been a hostage in 
Byzantium and had studied under the best teachers, while his father 
Valamer led the Goths after the sons of Attila in the time of Leo's rule. 
So Zeno now summoned him from Thrace to Byzantium and appointed 
him consul and commander of Thrace, and sent him out with John the 
Scythian against Illos. After Illos and Leontios had been shut up in the 
fortress of Papyrios, Theuderich left John to besiege them and he 
himself went to Zeno. He then set off for Thrace and after setting up 
camp there, he marched against Byzantium. Restrained by pity for the 
City and no other reason, as they say, he returned to Thrace and, 
persuaded by Zeno, marched down into Italy. After overcoming Odoacer 
in a great battle, he donned the regalia of a king in Ravenna. He 
subdued many other barbarians and in particular subjected the Vandals 
without even using arms against them. For Gizerich had already died 
before Theuderich came to Rome. Theuderich ruled Rome and all the 
West.
201




Zeno, 12th year Kabades, 6th 
year Felix, 3rd year Akakios, 
15th year Anastasios, 10th year
Peter Mangos, 2nd year
Peter the Fuller, 43rd bishop of Antioch, for the 2nd time (3 years), 1st year
 In this year the eastern bishops wrote to Akakios censuring him for having 
received Mangos into communion. He disregarded them and insolently forced 
everyone to be in communion with Mongos. Those from the capital and the East 
beseeched Felix, who had become bishop of Rome after the death of Simplicius, 
informing him that Akakios was the cause of the troubles. Among these was 
John of Alexandria, who came to Rome and made the same point. Felix, after 
holding a synod in the shrine of the chief apostle Peter, sent two bishops and an 
ekdilws to Constantinople, as well as writing to Zeno and Akakios to expel Peter 
Mangos from Alexandria as a heretic.
202

(AM 59791 AD 486/7)
Zeno, 13th year Kabades, 
7th year Felix, 4th year 
Akakios, 6th year 
Anastasios, 11th year
Peter Mongos, 3rd year Peter 
the Fuller, 2nd year
In this year the delegation from Rome was arrested in Abydos on the 
advice of Zeno and Akakios, their letter was confiscated, and 132 they 
were thrown into prison. Zeno threatened to execute them unless they joined 
in communion with Akakios and Peter Mongos.




Year of the divine Incarnation 480
Zeno, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 14th year Kabades, 
emperor of the Persians (11years), 8th year Felix, bishop of 
Rome (9 years) 5th year
Akakios, bishop of Constantinople (17 years), 17th year Anastasios, 
bishop of Jerusalem (18 years) 12th year
203



Peter Mangos, bishop of Alexandria (6 years), 4th year Peter, 43rd 
bishop of Antioch ( 3 years), 3rd year
 In this year Illos and Leontios, who after many battles had been besieged for 
four years in the fortress of Papyrios, were captured through the treachery of 
Trokoundos' brother in law, who had been sent by Zeno to deceive them. They 
were beheaded and their heads were sent to Zeno and brought into the 
Hippodrome fixed on poles. From there [they were taken] across to Sykai and 
exposed to public view.
  On Akakios' advice Zeno was forcing the eastern bishops to subscribe to the 
Henotikon and to enter into communion with Peter Mongos. After maltreating 
the legates from Felix of Rome and enticing them by bribery, Zeno persuaded 
them, contrary to their instructions, to have communion with Akakios. And yet 
the orthodox protested solemnly against them thrice, first by fixing a rope to a 
hook and having one of them suspend it in public; second by placing it in a 
book and third by putting it in a basket of vegetables. When Felix learned of 
the actions of his legates, he deposed them and also wrote to depose Akakios. 
The bearer of this evaded those at Abydos and reached the monastery of Dios. 
The monks of Dias served Akakios with the letter on a Sunday in the 
sanctuary. The supporters of Akakios killed some of the monks who had 
served the letter and punished others by imprisoning them. Akakios took no 
notice of the deposition and removed the name of Felix from the diptychs. 

204


Zeno, 15th year					  133
Kabades, 9th year Felix, 6th year
Fravitas, bishop of Constantinople ( 3 months), 1st year Anastasios, 13th year
Peter Mongos, 5th year
[No entry for Antioch]
 In this year Kalandion, bishop of Antioch, brought the relics of Eustathios the 
Great from Philippi, where the holy man had died in exile. The citizens of 
Antioch went out ten miles to meet them with great honour. Those who had 
separated from the Church because of the holy man were now reunited, one 
hundred years after his death.
  On Akakios' death Fravitas, after holding the bishopric for three months, 
wrote to Felix that he was in communion with him, and not with Peter 
Mongos, and he wrote to Mongos that he was in communion with him and 
rejected Felix of Rome. But Felix received a copy of the letter sent to Mongos, 
which had been intercepted by the orthodox, and when the messengers of 
Fravitas arrived with the synodical letter, Felix sent them back in dishonour. 
When Fravitas had died, Euphemios, presbyter of Neapolis, who was 
responsible for poor relief, obtained the bishopric of Constantinople and 
immediately expunged the name of Mongos from the diptychs with his own 
hands. Then he sat on his throne and inserted the name of Felix of Rome.


Year of the divine Incarnation 482
Zeno, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 16th year Kabades, emperor of the 
Persians (11 years), 10th year Felix, bishop of Rome (9 years), 7th year
Euphemios, bishop of Constantinople (7 years), 1st year Anastasios, bishop of 
Jerusalem (18 years), 14th year Peter Mongos, bishop of Alexandria (6 years), 
6th year Palladios, bishop of Antioch (10 years), 1st year
205



 In this year Peter Mangos died in Alexandria and Athanasios, surnamed 
Kelites, was ordained in his place. The emperor Zeno, freed from the 
pressure of the usurpers, expelled Kalandion from the Church of Antioch 
and banished him to 134 Oasis and reinstated Peter the Fuller. On the 
pretext of their support for the usurpers but in fact because (they had not 
accepted) Zeno's Henotikon, (he ordered that the following be driven out 
of their churches:) Nestor (of Tarsos, Kyros of Hierapolis, John of 
Kyrestai) Romanus of Chalcedon, Eusebios of Samosata, Julian of 
Mopsuestia, Paul of Constantina, Manos of Hemeria, and Andrew of 
Theodosioupolis. After entering Antioch, Peter the Fuller did much 
wrong, with anathematizations of the synod, expulsions of innocent 
bishops, illegal substitutions and ordinations, and other acts of this kind. 
Earlier he had added to the Trishagion 'Christ the King, who wast 
crucified for us.' On his return Peter removed the phrase 'Christ the 
King.
  Xenaias, the servant of Satan, was teaching that images of the Lord 
and of the saints should not be accepted. A Persian by race and a slave by 
status, he had fled from his master in the times of Kalandion and stirred 
up the villages round Antioch against the faith, claiming he was a cleric 
though he was not baptized. Kalandion drove him away, but Peter the 
Fuller ordained him bishop of Hierapolis, changing his name to 
Philoxenos. When Peter learned later that the man was unbaptized, he 
said that the ordination sufficed instead of baptism. 
  The most orthodox Euphemios drove out of Church the silentiarius 
Anastasios, the one who subsequently ruled wickedly as emperor, for 
being a heretic and of the same persuasion as Eutyches. When Euphemios 
saw Anastasios creating a riot, he overturned his chair in the church and 
threatened him that, unless he stopped, he would tonsure his head and 
parade him in mockery among the crowd. He brought the charge before 
Zeno and received authority over Anastasios.
  Zeno asked Maurianus, the most learned comes (for he had knowledge 
of certain secrets and used to give predictions), 'Who will be emperor 
after me?' He replied that 'A certain ex-silentiary will receive from you 
both your rule and your wife.' (Zeno detained the ex-silentiary Pelagios) 
patrician, who was learned, pious, intelligent, and virtuous, unjustly 
confiscated his property and cast him into prison, ordering that he be 
executed by the excubitors who guarded him. When the prefect Arkadios 
heard what had happened, he rebuked the emperor. When the emperor 
heard about this, he ordered that Arkadios be killed as he entered the palace. 
The prefect
206

 was informed of this and sought refuge in the church. So he escaped from a 
bitter death, but his house was confiscated.


207

      Year of the divine Incarnation 483
Zeno, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 17th year Kabades, 
emperor of the Persians (11years),11th year Felix, bishop of 
Rome (9 years), 8th year
Euphemios, bishop of Constantinople (7 years), 2nd year 
Anastasios, bishop of Jerusalem (18 years), 15th year 
Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria (7 years), 1st year Palladios, 
bishop of Antioch (10 years), 2nd year
 In this year Felix received the synodical letter of Euphemios and 
acknowledged him as orthodox, but did not accept him as bishop because 
he had not removed the names of Akakios and his successor Fravitas 
from the diptychs.
  In the same year Peter the Fuller died and Palladios was promoted to 
be bishop. He had been presbyter of the church of the holy first martyr 
Thekla in Seleukeia. The other candidates were John the son of 
Constantine and Anastasios the silentiarius who (later) ruled wickedly as 
emperor.
  Zeno, exulting in the destruction of the usurpers, had recourse to 
confiscations and unjust executions, accusing everybody either of having 
been allied with them or of having encouraged their attack. He senselessly 
killed Kottais, who along with John the Scythian had subdued Illos and 
Leontios by siege, and also the patrician Pelagios, an admirable man and 
a noteworthy epic poet, for being prudent and just.
  Amidst all this Zeno was seized by epilepsy and died, while 
continually repeating the name of Pelagios whom he had murdered 
unjustly. He left no son, but [did leave] his brother Longinus who had 
twice been consul and was leader of the 136    entire Senate, a 
stupid, overbearing, and licentious man. He had many Isaurians with him 
in Byzantium as well as the magister Longinus, who was his friend, and 
relying on these he expected to gain the Empire without difficulty. But 
when Areadne, the Senate, and the whole army proclaimed Anastasios the 
silentiary as emperor, Longinus lost his hopes.
  When Anastasios became emperor, he was asked by the patriarch 
Euphemios for a written declaration not to upset any part of the Church 
or the creed; [for Euphemios] described him as unworthy of the 
Christians and of the Empire. With the empress Areadne putting pressure 
on him and also the Senate, he gave his signature to a statement that he 
accepted the decisions of the synod at Chalcedon as the definition of 
faith. And so Anastasios was crowned by him and married Areadne. (He 
had not been previously married.)
208

  The Manichaeans and Arians were delighted with Anastasios, the 
Manichaeans because the emperor's mother was a zealous devotee of theirs, 
the Arians because his uncle Klearchos, the brother of his impious mother, 
shared their beliefs.
  This year, in which Zeno died and Anastasios became emperor, was the 
5999th since Adam according to the Romans, but according to the accurate 
and true computation of the Alexandrians it was the 5983rd, the 207th since 
the rule of Diocletian and 483rd since the divine Incarnation, the indiction 
being the 14th Anastasios was crowned in the Kathisma of the Hippodrome in 
the aforesaid 14th indiction on 1 4 April, it being Holy Thursday.

209




Year of the divine Incarnation 484
Anastasios, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 1st year
Zamasphos, son of Perozes, emperor of the Persians (4 years), 1st year
Felix, bishop of Rome (9 years), 9th year
Euphemios, bishop of Constantinople (7 years), 3rd year 
Anastasios, bishop of Jerusalem (18 years), 16th year 
Athanasios, bishop of Alexandria (7 years), 2nd year Palladios, 
bishop of Antioch (10 years), 3rd year
137 In this year, when Anastasios of Dyrrachium [surnamed] Twin pupil had 
become emperor, Zeno's brother Longinus staged a revolt against him. 
Anastasios captured him and sent him to banishment to Alexandria in 
Egypt and ordered that he be ordained a presbyter. After living for seven 
more years he died in Alexandria. The emperor, being also suspicious of 
the magister Longinus and the resident Isaurians, relieved him of office.
  Since Peter the Fuller wanted to return from banishment to his throne 
at Antioch, the emperor did recall him from banishment, but did not 
allow him to return to Antioch, where he caused Palladios to be 
ordained. Euphemios of Constantinople gathered the resident bishops and 
ratified the holy Synod of Chalcedon. When John the Tabennesiote, who 
was in Rome, heard that Anastasios had become emperor, he came to 
Byzantium expecting some worthwhile recompense from him in return 
for the favour he had bestowed on him in Alexandria, when, destitute 
after a shipwreck, Anastasios had been taken in and cared for so well by 
John as to make him forget his misfortune. But when Anastasios heard 
that John had arrived, with considerable ingratitude he ordered him to be 
banished, without receiving him at all. John learned of this in advance 
and was saved by fleeing to Rome.

210



Anastasios, 2nd year 
Zamasphos, 2nd year
Gelasios, bishop of Rome ( s years), 1st year 
Euphemios, 4th year 
Anastasios, 17th year 
Athanasios, 3rd year 
Palladios, 4th year
 In this year the emperor Anastasios expelled the Isaurians, who were in 
Constantinople, because of their many outrages. After departing they 
plotted to rebel. The ex-magister Longinus, after gathering these plus 
another force of barbarians and robbers numbering about 150,000, and relying 
on a good supply of weapons and money which Zeno had stored in Isauria, 
proceeded to the land of the Isaurians. The emperor had acquiesced in his 
departure although suspecting an attack. Longinus immediately rose in revolt 
and advanced as far as Kotyaeion in Phrygia, plundering 138 many cities, 
though he himself did not command the army. For this was done by 
Ninilingis, who had been appointed governor of Isauria in the time of Zeno, 
a very bold man, and by Athenodoros, a very silly man, one of the senators, 
and by Konon the bishop of Apameia, who had abandoned his throne and 
changed his status from priest to that of an armed soldier and a general. 
Against them Anastasios opposed
. 211



the Roman army, with John the Scythian as its commander, the one who had 
suppressed the usurpation of Illos and Leontios, together with John surnamed 
Kyrtos, both being commanders of the Thracian army, and Diogenes (these 
men were comites of the scholae) and certain other laudable men. A battle 
was fought near Kotyaeion, the general Ninilingis was killed and, with most 
of the Isaurian force destroyed, the rest scarcely reached the safety of their 
own country. If the Romans had not delayed over the spoils, they would have 
completely won the war. But since they made this mistake, the Isaurians, after 
getting control of a stronghold on the top of Mount Tauros, held out fighting 
into the third year, secure in their position among the towns and strongholds 
above the Tauros.



212


[AM 5986, AD 493/4)
Anastasios, 3rd year 
Zamasphos, 3rd year Gelasios, 
2nd year Euphemios, 5th year 
Anastasios, 18th year 
Athanasios, 4th year Palladios, 
5th year
In this year Claudiopolis, which lies in the plain between the two Tauroi, 
was captured by Diogenes. The Isaurians, not putting up with this, 
descended from the Tauras and besieged Diogenes for a long time, so that 
his army was in danger of perishing through hunger. But John Kyrtos 
went over the narrow passes of the Tauras, captured the guards, and, 
attacking suddenly, destroyed the army of the besiegers, while. Diogenes, 
too, made a sortie. It was then that the bishop Konon died shortly after 
being wounded, and the Romans gained this second very great victory. In the 
same year Zamasphes, the son of the Persian emperor Perozes, after 
driving out Kabades, ruled the Persians for four years in the middle of 
Kabades' period as ruler.





Anastasios, 4th year 
Zamasphos, 4th year Gelasios, 
3rd year Euphemios, 6th year
Martyrios, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 1st year Athanasios, 
5th year
Palladios, 6th year
In this year a certain Longinus, known as Selinountios, who lived 139 in Isaurian 
Antioch, which lies on a high mountain on the southern coast of the territory, 
brought in food supplies to the Isaurians, 

213



importing these from everywhere in numerous cargo vessels. Longinus the 
magister and Athenodoros remained in this difficult terrain.
  The emperor, wearied by the prolongation of the war, told the bishop 
Euphemios in confidence that he longed for peace, and ordered him to 
convene the resident bishops as if to make a plea on behalf of the Isaurians. 
Euphemios revealed the secret to the patrician John, father in law of 
Athenodoros, the leader of the rebellion. He raced off and announced this to 
the emperor, which roused the emperor Anastasios to an irreconcilable hatred 
of the bishop Euphemios. For this reason he imputed to Euphemios the plots 
of the saurians. Some persons who were plotting against Euphemios engaged a 
man to strike him on the head with a sword in front of the martyrium. But 
Paul, the ekdikos of church, who towered above the others, took the blow on 
his head and endangered himself, but he killed the plotter with what is known 
as a sera. Once again an ambush was set to kill Euphemios at the liturgical 
gathering 'of the Mount, but he escaped to safety by putting on civilian 
clothes. The emperor Anastasios used force to seize his confession from 
Euphemios. 

214


AM 5988 (AD 495/6]
Year of the divine Incarnation 488
Anastasios, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 5th year Kabades, 
emperor of the Persians (30 years), 1st year 1 Gelasios, bishop of 
Rome (5 years) 4th year
Euphemios, bishop of Constantinople (7 years), 7th year 
Martyrios, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 1st year Athanasios, 
bishop of Alexandria (7 years), 6th year Palladios, bishop of 
Antioch (10 years), 7th year
In this year John the Scythian besieged and captured the ex-magister 
Longinus, Longinus Selinountios, Athenodoros, and the other rebels. After 
beheading them, he sent their heads to the emperor	140 Anastasios in 
Byzantium. Anastasios held the chariot races and paraded in triumph the 
heads of the rebels and the Isaurians, who had been sent in chains, and, after 
fixing the heads on stakes he displayed them publicly in Sykai, and 
transferred the mass of the. Isaurians to Thrace. He rewarded John the 
Scythian and the other John (Kyrtos) with the rank of consul and great 
honours. He sent this message through the magister Eusebios to bishop 
Euphemios, 'Your prayers, great sir, have befouled your friends.' The 
emperor, after gathering the resident bishops, censured Euphemios, after 
which the bishops, to show their favour to the emperor, voted for his 
excommunication and deposition. The emperor appointed Makedonios as 
bishop of Constantinople, who was (then) sacristan (of the same Church). 
But the people rioted on account of Euphemios and ran into the Hippodrome 
to perform a litany, but were not able to achieve anything, with the emperor 
bent on a wicked victory. Makedonios was wrongly persuaded by Anastasios 
to put his. signature to Zeno's Henotikon.

215




Anastasios, 6th year Kabades, 
2nd year Gelasios, 5th year
Makedonios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 1st year Martyrios, 2nd 
year
Athanasios, 7th year Palladios, 
8th year
 In this year Anastasios banished Euphemios to Euchaita. Euphemios sought to 
have an assurance through Makedonios that he would not be plotted against 
during his removal. Makedonios, having been empowered to give this 
assurance, approached Euphemios in the baptistery, ordered the archdeacon to 
divest him of his pallium, and thus dressed as a private citizen went up to 
Euphemios, and gave him money which he had borrowed, for which he was 
praised by many for two reasons. For he was both austere as well as holy, as 
one brought up by Gennadios whose nephew he was.
  In the same year Athanasios, the bishop of Alexandria, died. In his place 
was elected John the monk, a presbyter and oilwnomos, surnamed Hemoula.



[AM 5990, AD 497/8)
Anastasios, 7th year Kabades, 3rd 
year
Anastasios, bishop of Rome (2 years), 1st year 
Makedonios, 2nd year
216


.LJ.....LY.1. .) )1 )1 .L




Martyrios, 3rd year
John, bishop of Alexandria (9 years), 1st year Palladios, 9th 
year
 In this year there was an invasion of the so-called tent-dwelling	141 Arabs 
into Euphratesia. Eugenios, an earnest man in both word and deed, who commanded 
the army in those parts, met them at Bithrapsa in the first region of Syria and defeated 
them in battle. The vanquished [Arabs] who were tributaries of the Persians, were of 
the tribe of the phylarch Naaman. At that time Romanus was commander of the army 
in Palestine, an excellent man. Both by good planning and generalship, he captured in 
battle Ogaros, the son of Arethas (the latter being known as the son of Thalabane), 
together with a great mass of prisoners. Before the battle Romanus had worsted and 
put to flight another tent dweller, Cabalas by name, who had overrun Palestine before 
Romanus' arrival. At that time also the island of Iotabe, which lies in the gulf of the 
Red Sea and was subject to the Roman emperor, paying considerable tribute, but 
which in the meantime had been seized by the tent-dwelling Arabs, was set free by 
Romanus after fierce battles, and given back to the Roman traders to inhabit under its 
own laws, to import goods from the Indies and to bring the assessed tax to the 
emperor. I la

(AM 5991, AD 498/9]
Anastasios, 8th year Kabades, 4th year Anastasios, 2nd year Makedonios, 3rd year






217



Martyrios, 4th year John, 2nd 
year Palladios, 10th year
 In this year Makedonios, at the emperor's instigation, attempted to unite the 
monasteries of the capital that had seceded because of Zeno's Henotikon. 
Being unable to do this, he advised the emperor to call together the resident 
bishops and to affirm in writing what had been excellently laid down as 
doctrine at Chalcedon. This was done by means of a written protocol. He 
urged the monasteries to unity, in particular the monastery of Dios, that of 
Bassianos, the monastery of the Sleepless Ones, and that of Matrona for these 
especially had separated from those that accepted Zeno's Henotikon and 
eagerly submitted to banishment. Because of their resistance, Makedonios 
decided to leave them to their own course of action
142	rather than instigate a persecution against them. The holy Matrona, who was still 
alive and refused communion along with the nuns at her monastery because of 
Zeno's Henotikon, demonstrated numerous miracles, with Chrysaorios, a 
deacon of the Church, putting pressure on her. A certain Sophia, too, who was 
notable among the nuns and who had suffered greatly, showed remarkable 
endurance. Theuderich the African had an orthodox deacon who was much loved 
by him and who converted to Arianism to please the Arian Theuderich. 
Theuderich beheaded him with his sword, saying, 'If you could not keep your 
faith for God, you would not have kept it for me.
  On the death of Palladios, bishop of Antioch, the emperor appointed Flavian 
who was presbyter and apokrisiarios of the Church of Antioch. They say that 
Flavian was opposed to the doc­ trines of Chalcedon.
  A certain Olympios, an Arian, who was washing in the baths of Helenianai, 
died miserably in the pool after uttering terrible blasphemies. This was 
depicted on an image. A certain Eutychianos, who was chief of the diaitarii, 
after being bribed by the Arians, removed the picture of Olympios which had 
been put up. His body wasted away terribly from that day and he died.

218



AM 5992 [AD 499/500]
Year of the divine Incarnation 492
Anastasios, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 9th year Kabades, 
emperor of the Persians (30 years), 5th year Anastasios, bishop of 
Rome (9 years), 3rd year Makedonios, bishop of Constantinople (16 
years), 4th year Martyrios, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 5th year
7	John, bishop of Alexandria (9 years), 3rd year
l)	Flavian, bishop of Antioch (13 years), 1st year

219



In this year Festus, a Roman senator, who had been sent to Anastasios 
on certain public business, requested that the commemoration of the 
holy apostles Peter and Paul should be celebrated with greater festivity, a 
usage that has survived until now.
143	Makedonios, who wanted to use Festus to send his synodical letter to 
Anastasios, bishop of Rome, was prevented by the emperor.


(AM 5993, AD 500/1)
Anastasios, 10th year 
Kabades, 6th year 
Anastasios, 4th year 
Makedonios, 5th year 
Martyrios, 6th year 
John, 4th year Flavian, 
2nd year
 In this year Festus, as he was going back to Rome, promised the 
emperor Anastasios that he would persuade Pope Anastasios to accept 
Zeno's Henotikon, but he found the pope dead on his return. By 
corrupting many with money he secured the election, contrary to Roman 
practice, of a certain Laurentius as bishop, who was ordained by one 
faction. The more orthodox separated themselves and
ordained Symmachos, who was one of the deacons. As a resultmany disorders 
occurred, including murders and rapine, for a period of three years, until 
Theuderich the African, who was at the time controlling Rome, though he was 
an Arian, summoned a local synod, confirmed Symmachos as bishop of Rome, 
and ordered
220


Laurentius to be bishop of the city of Nuceria. But Laurentius did not stay 
quiet and, after creating trouble, was deposed by Symmachos and sent into 
banishment. And thus the discord ceased.
  In the same year Anastasios abolished the silver and gold tax and wild beast 
fights and made the magistracies, which used to be bought, free of charge.
221




Anastasios, 11th year 
Kabades, 7th year
Symmachos, bishop of Rome (12 years), 1st year 
Makedonios, 6th year 
Martyrios, 7th year John, 
5th year
Flavian, 3rd year
 In this year there was again an incursion of the Saracens in Phoenicia, 
Syria, and Palestine after the death of Ogaros. His brother Badicharimos 
overran these regions like a hurricane and retreated with the booty even 
more swiftly than he had invaded, so that Romanus who pursued him 
could not catch up with the enemy.
  In the same year the Bulgars, as they are called, invaded Illyricum 
and Thrace and returned before being recognized.


144	[AM 59951 AD 502/J)
Anastasios, 12th year 
Kabades, 8th year 
Symmachos, 2nd year 
Makedonios, 7th year
Salustius, 51St bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 1st year John, 
6th year
Flavian, 4th year
222


In this year Anastasios made a treaty with Arethas (known as the son of 
Thalabane), the father of Badicharimos and Ogaros after which all Palestine, 
Arabia, and Phoenice enjoyed much peace and calm.
  In Neocaesarea, when an earthquake was about to occur, a soldier, who was 
passing that way, saw two soldiers there and another further back, who was 
shouting, 'Guard the house which has Gregory's tomb'. The earthquake occurred 
and most of the city collapsed except for the [church of] St Gregory the miracle 
worker.





Year of the divine Incarnation 496
Anastasios, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 13th year Kabades, 
emperor of the Persians (30 years), 9th year Symmachos, bishop of Rome 
(12 years), 3rd year Makedonios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 
8th year Salustius, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 2nd year
John, bishop of Alexandria (9 years), 7th year Flavian, bishop 
of Antioch (13 years), 5th year
 In this year Kabades, the emperor of the Persians, demanded money from 
Anastasios. Anastasios said that if Kabades wanted a loan, he should make a 
receipt in writing; if it were in any other form, he would not pay. As a result 
Kabades violated the peace treaty that had previously been made with 
Theodosios the younger, and with a large army of Persians and foreigners 
invaded first of all Armenia, where he captured Theodosioupolis, which was 
betrayed by Constantine, a senator who had been commander of the Illyrian 
detachments. Next he went to Mesopotamia and besieged Amida, since no 
worthwhile Roman army was yet stationed in that region.

223



Only Alypios was there with a small force. He was praised by everyone 
and was a lover of philosophy and took such care as he could
145 both for the defence of the cities and the supply of food. He himself 
lived at Constantina, 507 stades to the west of Nisibis and an equal 
distance from Amida to the north. But some time having meanwhile 
elapsed, and several engagements having taken place between the 
Romans and the Persians, in which the Romans sometimes got the 
worse and sometimes the better of the foreigners in different places, 
Amida was finally betrayed to the Persians, after being besieged for 
over three months by the barbarians. It was betrayed during the night 
by monks who were guarding one of the towers. The enemy, who 
entered the city by climbing ladders, plundered and destroyed it all 
and captured considerable riches. The emperor Kouades came to the 
city on an elephant on the third day after its betrayal and removed 
great riches. He left Glones to guard the city while he him­ self 
returned to the city of Nisibis and the Persian forces remained between 
Amida and Constantia.

224


(AM 5997 , AD 504/ 5]
Anastasios, 14th year 
Kabades, 10th year 
Symmachos, 4th year 
Makedonios, 9th year 
Salustius, 3rd year John, 
8th year
Flavian, 6th year
 In this year an army of Goths, Bessi, and other Thracian races was sent 
out by the emperor Anastasios under the command of Areobindos? son of 
Dagalaiphos, who was magister militum per Orientem and exarch3 of it 
and had been consul ordinarius. His grandfather on his father's side had 
been the Areobindos who had served with distinction against the Persians 
in the time of Theodosios the younger, and he was born to Dagalaiphos 
by Godisthea, the daughter of Ardabourios, son of Aspar, whom we
have previously mentioned. Many other generals were sent with 146 Areobindos 
of whom the most distinguished were Patricius, Hypatios (whose parents were 
Secundinus and the sister of the emperor Anastasios), Pharismanes the father of 
Zounas, a Laz by
race, the aforesaid Romanus, who linked up with the army from 
Euphratesia, Justin, who later became emperor, Zemarchos, and several 
others. The army gathered in Edessa, a city of Osrhoene, and at 
Samosata, a city of Euphratesia. The forces under Hypatios and Patricius 
were engaged in freeing Amida from the Persian garrison. Areobindos, 
campaigning with Romanus, the phylarch Asouades and several others 
against Kouades himself, who was then staying at Nisibis, prevailed 
against the Persians in various battles and drove Kouades out of Nisibis, 
forcing him to retreat many days' journey inside its territory. In one 
engagement there fell the greatest of the Persian generals, whose sword 
and bracelet were brought to Areobindos by the Scythian who had killed 
him, and then sent to the emperor, a noteworthy and particularly clear 
token of victory. And so with the Persian army defeated to this extent by 
the Roman generals, Kouades got ready and sent against the Romans a 
very large army, with the result that Areobindos urged the forces with 
Hypatios and Patricius to hasten to his help from the area round Amida. 
When they declined out of envy, Areobindos wanted to

225

retreat and to return to Byzantium, and was only kept in those parts by 
the Egyptian Appian, who was second in command of the army and in 
charge of supplies and general supervision. While the 
147 generals were at odds with one another, Kouades came to Nisibis and, 
having learned of the discord among the generals, he himself, in a 
powerful position with his large force, divided up his own army in many 
places and overran almost the entire Roman territory, pushing as far as the 
Syrias. Meanwhile he sent many envoys to Areobindos to discuss peace, 
saying that he would end the war on payment of money. He then overran 
in particular the territory round Edessa, where Areobindos was. However, 
he did not accomplish anything successfully there but, contrary to 
expectations, he came off worst in a battle with Areobindos. Knowing, too, 
that his general Clones, with the garrison at Amida, had been destroyed 
following a plot against him, he marched back in distress· along another 
route, neglecting the hostages whom he had given to Areobindos during 
the peace talks. They also retained, contrary to .the agreements, the 
excellent Alypios and Basil of Edessa; so that after his retreat to his own 
territory (since winter had already arrived), the Roman generals divided 
themselves among the various cities of Euphratesia, Osrhoene, 
Mesopotamia, Syria, and Armenia, and encamped for the winter season.
  In the same year when the chariot races were held, disorder broke out 
among the two factions and many people died on both sides, including the 
son of the emperor Anastasios whom he had by a concubine. Being 
extremely upset, Anastasios punished many and sent others into 
banishment.
226


AM 5998 (AD 505/6)
Year of the divine Incarnation 498
Anastasios, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 15th year Kabades, 
emperor of the Persians (30 years), 11th year Symmachos, bishop of 
Rome (12 years), 5th year Makedonios, bishop of Constantinople (16 
years), 10th year Salustius, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 3rd year
John, bishop of Alexandria (9 years), 9th year Flavian, 
bishop of Antioch (13 years), 7th year
  In this year the magister Celar was sent out by the emperor with a very 
large force under him and took over almost all authority	     148 together 
with the general Areobindos. The emperor entrusted to
them the management of the entire war. He recalled Appion and 
Hypatios with all speed to Byzantium, thinking it was not necessary that 
either of them remain with the army because of their hostility towards the 
general Areobindos and he appointed the general

227



Kalliopios to be in charge of supplies. Accordingly Celar managed the 
whole war extremely well together with Areobindos, Patricius, 
Bonosos, Timostratos, Romanus, and the others in their various 
regions; for he was a man filled with God's grace as well as good 
sense and learning of every kind, a brave man, a native of Illyricum, 
from where Anastasios also came. Many forts in Persian territory were 
overrun in the incursions and destroyed by fire or by other means, so 
that even Nisibis itself nearly fell to the Romans. For hunger was by 
then affecting the Persians, and besides they had to face a tribal 
uprising of the so-called Kadousioi and other races. In short, the 
Romans prevailed over the Persians, so that Kouades sent the general 
Aspetios to discuss peace urgently with them, [instructing him,] even 
if he gained little or nothing in return, to hand back Amida to the 
Romans who, despite their enormous effort, had not yet been able to 
capture it from the Persians, even though hunger was oppressing the 
garrison, because of the nature of the site and the unbreachable walls. 
The generals, seeing that winter was approaching again, and judging 
that it was preferable to redeem the Roman army for a few talents 
from the harsh wintry conditions of those places where the discussions 
with Aspetios took place, handed over three talents6 and got back 
Basil of Edessa, who was still being held a hostage by the Persians 
(the excellent Alypios had died after 
149 suffering an illness among them), and returned the hostages whom they 
held. They won back Amida and made the covenants for the peace on 
the border between the forts of Ammoudia and Marde, and ratified them 
in writing. Such was the end of Anastasios' Persian War in the 15th year 
of his reign. It had lasted for three years and had harmed the territory 
of the Persians more than previous wars, reaching this conclusion in the 
15th year of Anastasios' reign.
  On the death of John, bishop of Alexandria, John Nikaiotes was 
ordained in his place.
  In the same year, on Anastasios' order, many of the bronze works which 
Constantine the Great had erected, were melted down. Out of these 
Anastasios made a statue of himself which he set up on the column of 
the Tauros. For the one of Theodosios the Great, which had stood there 
earlier, had fallen and been shattered during an earthquake. 

228

AM 5999 [AD 506/7)
Year of the divine Incarnation 499
Anastasios, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 16th year Kabades, 
emperor of the Persians (30 years), 12th year Symmachos, bishop of 
Rome (12 years), 6th year Makedonios, bishop of Constantinople 
(16 years), 11th year Salustius, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 4th 
year
John Nikaiotes, bishop of Alexandria (11years), 1st year Flavian, 
bishop of Antioch (13 years), 8th year
   In this year Anastasios, free from wars, was bent on diverting the 
patriarch Makedonios from the orthodox faith. Many of the bishops, to 
win Anastasios' favour, rejected the Synod of Chalcedon: of whom the 
foremost was Eleusinios of Sasima. Anastasios brought a Syro Persian 
Manichaean painter from Kyzikos, in the guise of a presbyter, who dared 
to depict certain fantastic subjects, quite different from the holy images 
of churches, in the palace of Helenianai and in St Stephen of Aurelianai, 
on the instruction of the emperor who applauded the Manichaeans. This 
led to a great uprising among					
		150

229

the people. Then the emperor decided that the prefect should accompany him 
at services and at processions of prayer, for he was afraid of rebellions among 
the orthodox. This became customary practice. Anastasios brought the 
Manichaean minded Xenaias, also called Philoxenos, to Byzantium as 
someone of his own persuasion. But Makedonios would not deem him worthy 
either of communion or conversation, while the clergy, monks, and people 
caused disturbances against him. So Anastasios secretly removed him from the 
city. Makedonios ordered that a certain Acholios who had drawn his sword 
against him at the instigation of his enemies, was to receive monthly corn 
rations, and was praised for his moderation. He did the same to the needy 
who stole from the Church.
  In the same year a man who was an alchemist made his appearance in 
Antioch, a terrible impostor named John, who, after stealthily entering the 
shops of the silversmiths, showed them hands and feet of statues made of gold 
as well as other figures. He would say, 'I have found treasure full of these.' He 
deceived and fooled many and made off with a lot of money. He managed to 
flee from there and came to Constantinople, where he also deceived many 
people, so that the emperor, when he got to know about this, arrested the man. 
He brought to the emperor a horse's bridle of solid gold studded with pearls. 
Accepting this, the emperor said to him, 'You are certainly not tricking me', 
and banished him to Petra, a fort in Asia, where he died.

(AM 6000, AD 507/8)
Anastasios, 17th year 
Kabades, 13th year
Symmachos 7th year
Makedonios 12th year
Salustius 5th year
John Nikaiotes 2nd year
Flavian 9th year

   In this year the emperor Anastasios walled Daras a large and strong 
village of Mesopotamia which lies between the boundaries of the 
Romans and the Persians. He built churches there and storehouses for 
keeping grain and cisterns of water and porticoes and named it 
Anastasioupolis. He also built two public baths and gave it the privileges 
of a city.

AM 600I [AD 508/9]								151
Year of the divine Incarnation 501
Anastasios emperor of the Romans (27 years) 18th year
Kabades emperor of the Persians (30 years) 14th year
Symmachos bishop of Rome (12 years) 8th year
Makedonios bishop of Constantinople (16 years) 13th year
Salustius, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years) 6th year
John1 bishop of Alexandria (11 years) 3rd year
Flavian bishop of Antioch (13 years) 10th year

   In this year the emperor Anastasios compelled Flavian, bishop of 
Antioch, to subscribe to Zeno's Henotikon. After holding a synod of the 
bishops under him he wrote a lengthy letter in which he supported the 
synods of Nicaea, Constantinople, and Ephesos but remained silent about 
that of Chalcedon. He renounced Diodoros and Theodore, and subjoined 
four chapters wherein he appears not to be in agreement with the Synod 
of Chalcedon, and, in particular, rejects the phrase 'in two natures'. Some 
say that these chapters were the work of Akakios of Constantinople. But 
Flavian wrote a private letter to Anastasios supporting the latter's 
purpose. Likewise there was the impious Xenaias, who reached such 
audacity that he


231




added to these chapters anathemas against the most holy Leo of Rome, 
the synod, and those agreeing with it. Constantine, bishop of Seleukeia, 
anathematized the holy Synod of Chalcedon, writing the same as 
Xenaias. Flavian, to discredit them, wrote to the emperor informing 
him of this. But the emperor grew angry with him and gave preference 
to Constantine and Xenaias. Anastasios wrote to Helias, bishop of 
Jerusalem, ordering him to pass judgement against the Synod of 
Chalcedon, but Helias replied to the emperor anathematizing 
Nestorios, Eutyches, Diodoros, and Theodore, and accepting the Synod 
of Chalcedon.
  In the same year a disturbance broke out in Alexandria between John 
Nikaiotes, the bishop, and Dagalaiphos, the comes, over
152 Gennadios Phikopteros. The discord lasted in the city for many days. The 
soldiers burned down the house of John the bishop, while the house of 
Phikopteros was burned by the citizens. The Alexandrians set up a 
statue of the emperor in the Antikantharos. 5-



(AM 6002, AD 509/10)
Anastasios, 19th year 
Kabades, 15th year 
Symmachos, 9th year 
Makedonios, 14th year 
Salustius, 7th year 
John, 4th year
Flavian, 11th year

232

 I n this year 200 heretical monks came to Byzantium from the East 
together with the impious Severus and were active in opposing 
Makedonios and the synod. Anastasios received them with honour for 
being enemies of the truth who had caused trouble in the East and were 
now doing the same here. John, bishop of Alexandria, promised to give 
the emperor 2,000 pounds of gold if he repudiated finally the Synod of 
Chalcedon. The emperor tried to force Makedonios to take communion 
with the legates of John and to accept John, but he would not accept 
him nor would he reject the synod. Makedonios opposed this, saying he 
would not be in communion with them unless they accepted the Synod 
of Chalcedon as their mother and teacher.
  Deuterios, bishop of the Arians in Byzantium, while baptizing 
someone called Barbas, dared to say, contrary to the Lord's teaching, 
'Barbas is baptized in the name of the Father, through the Son, in the 
Holy Ghost.' The font immediately dried up. Barbas, who was terrified, 
fled and told everyone about the miracle.
  The emperor put pressure on Makedonios, bishop of Constantinople, 
to anathematize the Synod of Chalcedon as Helias of Jerusalem had 
done. But Makedonios said that without an ecumenical synod under the 
presidency of the bishop of Rome it was impossible to do this. As a 
result, the emperor, out of hostility to him, ordered that those who 
sought refuge in the Church be dragged away by force, while providing 
rights of asylum to the churches of heretics. All the heretics, both 
clergy and lay, who happened to be in Byzantium frequented Severus 
and the heretical eastern monks in their striving against Makedonios. 
But the God-inspired monks of Palestine, moved by a divine zeal, came 
to Byzantium to oppose Severus and the monks on his side. Dorotheos, 
an Alexandrian
monk, wrote a very lengthy work in support of the Synod of    153 Chalcedon, 
which he gave to Magna, the sister in law of Anastasios through his brother, 
who was herself orthodox. She offered the book
to Anastasios, hoping that he would change his mind because of it. But 
when he had read it and found it was contrary to his own view, he 
banished Dorotheos to Oasis and condemned the book because of the 
inscription, 'A tragedy, that is a prophecy of the present state'; the same 
words, it is said, were used by Basil the Great against Julian. Makedonios 
anathematized Flavian of Antioch and all those who dared say anything 
against the synod, and he also anathematized and expelled Flavian's legates 
who had come to him on some business.

233






[AM 6003, AD 510/11)
Anastasios, 20th year 
Kabades, 16th year 
Symmachos, 10th year 
Makedonios, 15th year 
Salustius, 8th year 
John, 5th year
Flavian, 12th year
   In this year Anastasios decreed that a synod be proclaimed at Sidon.1 
For Soterichos, the bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, while being 
ordained by Makedonios, confessed in writing that he accepted the 
tenets of the Synod of Chalcedon as the definition of the faith. But 
later he became so very hostile that he departed to the East and held 
joint counsel with the impious Xenaias, and both requested the emperor 
to hold a synod at Sidon with a view to the final rejection of the holy 
Synod of Chalcedon. The synod met and was quickly dismissed, with 
the emperor sending the tribune Eutropios for this purpose, who, after 
dismissing it, arranged for Flavian of Antioch and Helias of Jerusalem 
together with their bishops to write to the emperor what was pleasing 
to him. Flavian wrote that he accepted the three synods only plus the 
Henotikon of Zeno, but made no mention of the Synod of Chalcedon. 
Helias of Jerusalem wrote that he also rejected Chalcedon. But 
Soterichos of Caesarea and Xenaias denounced Flavian and Helias to 
the emperor to the effect that they had not met with one another 
through their unwillingness to deny in clear terms the Synod of 
Chalcedon. In his anger, Anastasios instigated some spurious monks to 
gather in Antioch and to stir up discord against Flavian by requesting 
him to anathematize
154.	154	the Synod of Chalcedon, as well as Diodoros, Theodore, Ibas, 
and
234



Theodoret. Through lack of fortitude Flavian did this and in church he 
anathematized them along with the synod. I la2
  In the same year the emperor also plotted against Makedonios. The 
schismatics, supported by a hired throng, in singing the Trishagion on a Sunday in 
the church of the Archangel in the palace and in the Great Church, added the 
phrase 'Who wast crucified for us', so that the orthodox were forced to drive them 
out with blows. The emperor, through the agency of the schismatic monks and 
clerics and of Julian (formerly bishop of Caria and subsequently of Halikarnassos) 
and the impious Severus, who was still a monk, openly attacked Makedonios, 
hurling disgraceful insults at him in public. But the masses, including women and 
children and the abbots of the orthodox monks, gathered and chanted, 'Now is the 
time for martyrdom, Christians: let us not desert our father!', and they abused the 
emperor for being a Manichee and unworthy of power. He, in fear, locked the 
gates of the palace and prepared ships for flight. And having sworn that he would 
never see Makedonios again, he now invited him into his presence out of fear of 
the masses. As Makedonios was making his way to the emperor, the people called 
solemnly to the abbots and the monks, saying 'We have our father from you.' 
Even the men of the scholae acclaimed him as he passed through. On coming 
before Anastasios, he charged him with being an enemy of the Church. 
Anastasios pretended for the time being to be at one with Makedonios.



Anastasios, 21st year Kabades, 17th year



235



Symmachos, 11th year 
Makedonios, 16th year
Helias, 52nd bishop of Jerusalem (23 years), 1st year John, 6th 
year
Flavian, 13th year
   In this year the emperor deceived Makedonios through the agency 
of the magister Celar, having sent him a memorandum in which he 
agreed to accept the first and second synods, but omitted Ephesos and 
Chalcedon. This brought much censure on Makedonios. It was for this 
reason that he accepted Zeno's Henotikon to which he had
154.	155	subscribed at the time of his ordination. Makedonios then 
went to the monastery of Dalmatos, where he defended himself in an 
address to the zealous monks and clergy, who were shocked at his 
actions, stating that he accepted the Synod at Chalcedon and held 
those who did not accept it as heretics. They then celebrated the 
liturgy with him. The emperor bribed the monks and clergy who 
shared his beliefs to elect another bishop, which greatly saddened 
both Areadne and the members of the Senate. For Makedonios was 
loved both for the purity of his life and the correctness of his 
doctrines, even if he had been deceived. The emperor then arranged 
for two worthless fellows to accuse Makedonios of being a pederast 
and a heretic and to hand these accusations in writing to the prefect 
and to the magister, and to make similar charges against orthodox 
presbyters and deacons. He then ordered the magister Celar to 
remove Makedonios from the bishop's palace by force, while 
Makedonios shouted out that he was ready to defend himself not only 
in the Praetorium but even in the theatre. Many of the clergy were 
thrown into prison. Others, who were able to escape, dispersed to 
Rome and Phoenicia. The impious emperor through the agency of the 
magister was eager to obtain the original document of the proceedings 
at Chalcedon from Makedonios so that it could be destroyed. 
Makedonios sealed the document and placed it in the sanctuary. But 
the eunuch Kalopodios who was an oikonomos of the Great Church, 
stole it and took it to the emperor. Then, one night the emperor took 
Makedonios away by force to Chalcedon and ordered that from there 
he be banished to Euchaita, not daring to examine any of the charges 
against him for fear of the people. On the following day he appointed 
as bishop a certain Timothy, presbyter and sacristan of the church, 
also called Dirty Glutton and Stallion because of some activities that 
fit these names. He, on entering the churches, took down the images 
of Makedonios before holding the service. He inscribed John 
Nikaiotes, bishop of Alexandria, in the

diptychs and sent a synodical letter to him. Anastasios, when he
realized that he had banished Makedonios without deposition or	156 
trial, sent a magistrianus, who stopped him beyond Claudiopolis in
Honorias. The same men, acting as judges, witnesses, and accusers, then 
deposed Makedonios in his absence, when he had already been driven 
out before the judgement, and sent the notice of deposition through some 
bishops and a presbyter of Kyzikos. When Makedonios saw them, before 
they could say anything, he asked them if they accepted the Synod of 
Chalcedon. When they asked, 'What is the point of that?' he replied 'If 
Sabbatians or Makedonians were to bring me my deposition, I would 
have to accept it.' So they returned with their mission unaccomplished, 
while Makedonios went to Euchaita.
  Then the law-breaking emperor attempted to expel Flavian from the 
bishopric of Antioch and to replace him with Severus, the declared 
enemy of truth. His accusers charged him for anathematizing the synod 
with his mouth only and not with his heart. Then the officials, sent by 
the emperor to expel him, advised him to withdraw for a while because 
of the tumult. As soon as he departed to Platanoi, they immediately 
ordained the impious Severus, who had lain in wait at the monastery of 
the Schismatics near Maiouma of Gaza. They banished Flavian to Petrai 
as well as many other bishops, who were bound in irons, and clergy and 
monks.
  Helias of Jerusalem, compelled by the emperor either to enter into 
communion with Severus or be expelled from his bishopric, with the 
monks fortifying him, chose to be deposed from his bishopric. John, 
former custodian of the Cross, was ordained and agreed to do whatever 
they wanted, but after his ordination did nothing further.

237



157	AM 6005 [AD 512/13)
Year of the divine Incarnation 505
Anastasios, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 22nd year 
Kabades, emperor of the Persians (30 years), 18th year 
Symmachos, bishop of Rome (12 years), 12th year Timothy, 
bishop of Constantinople (6 years), 1st year Helias, bishop of 
Jerusalem (23 years), 2nd year
John, bishop of Alexandria (11years), 7th year Severus, 
bishop of Antioch (7 years), 1st year
   In this year Vitalian, son of Patriciolus who was comes foederatorum was 
invited by the orthodox in Scythia, Mysia, and other lands to rise up 
against the impious Anastasios. Having risen in
238

revolt, he destroyed thousands upon thousands of soldiers fighting for 
Anastasios, and captured a vast amount of gold sent to them for their 
wages and also battle weapons, provisions, and other such things. It is said 
that in a single battle he hurled down 65,000 of the imperial army, including 
their general Hypatios (the son of Anastasios' sister and the patrician 
Secundinus), whom he captured alive and held in prison.
  Anastasios, the law breaking emperor, and Timothy, the impious bishop 
of Constantinople, performed many evil acts against the monks, clergy, and 
laity who supported Makedonios and the synod, so that many were banished 
to Oasis in the Thebaid. They sent Timothy's synodical letter and 
Makedonios' notice of deposition to the bishops in each city to sign. Of these 
the braver resisted both, but those of unstable character subscribed to both 
out of fear of the emperor. Those in the middle did not subscribe to 
Makedonios' deposition but only to Timothy's synodical letter, which was 
the same thing although they claimed there was a difference. When Timothy 
wanted to inscribe the name of Severus in the diptychs and to remove that of 
Flavian he was prevented by the people. For all the orthodox avoided 
communion with Severus, especially the monks, against whom this 
sacrilegious man exacted vengeance with the aid of a crowd of peasants, 
killing many, overturning the altars, and melting down the sacred vessels of 
the orthodox. The most noble Juliana, who founded the 158    sacred church 
of the Mother of God at Honoratoi, was so firm in her support of the Synod of 
Chalcedon that even the emperor, who devised many traps for her, was 
unable to persuade her to be in communion with Timothy. And though 
Timothy himself often visited her, he was unable to persuade her. By means of 
many difficulties the emperor humiliated his own nephew Pompeius and the 
latter's wife, a lady of decorum who devoted herself to good works, because 
of their championing the synod and because they provided Makedonios 
with the necessities of life in exile. The delegates sent by Timothy to John 
Nikaiotes in Alexandria anathematized the Holy Synod of Chalcedon from 
the ambo. When the abbot of the monastery of Dias died, Timothy came to 
appoint the new abbot. But the one who was about to be appointed said 
that he would not accept benediction from a man who rejected the Synod 
of Chalcedon. Timothy said, 'Anathema to anyone who does not accept the 
Synod of Chalcedon.' And so the abbot consented to being appointed by him. 
But Timothy's archdeacon, John, being a Manichee, insulted Timothy and 
reported the matter to the emperor. When the emperor had grievously 
abused Timothy to his face, the latter denied it and once more began   	
		239


anathematizing those who accepted the Synod of Chalcedon. The impious 
John of Alexandria prevented Egyptians from travelling to Jerusalem so 
that they would not take communion with [those who supported] the Synod 
of Chalcedon at the exaltation of the Cross. At that time some frightening 
things were done .by demoniacs in Jerusalem.
  A certain Anastasios, who wanted to be made dux of Palestine, made the 
following promise to the emperor, 'If I cannot persuade John, who 
succeeded Helias as bishop of Jerusalem, to be in communion with 
Severus, I shall give you 300 pounds of gold.' He was given the appointment 
and went to Jerusalem and when John was not persuaded, he put him in 
prison. A certain Zacharias, a pious man who was a magistrate in Palestine, 
moved by holy zeal, suggested to the bishop that he promise the dux that he 
would do what the latter wanted provided he was restored to his throne. 
After the dux had set him free and restored him, John assembled the monks in 
the church of St Stephen, mounted the pulpit, and      159 anathematized 
Nestorios, Eutyches, Severus, and Soterichos of Caesarea, and 
proclaimed the four holy ecumenical synods. Among those present was 
Hypatios, the emperor's nephew, who was not at all in communion with 
Severus. And having on that occasion taken communion with John, he 
gave one hundred pounds of gold to the holy Theodosios, who was 
exarch of the monasteries, for distribution among the monks who were 
active in supporting the true faith and the Synod of Chalcedon.
  The emperor ordered that some magistrates should declare the 
addition to the Trishagion from the pulpit of the church of St Theodore 
of Sphorakios. As a result the crowds came out in anger on the day of the 
litany that is celebrated at the Triconch in commemoration of [the fall of] 
dust. Next Timothy ordained through a written memorandum to all the 
churches of the city that the Trishagion be recited during litanies with 
the addition. Many did this out of fear. But the monks came and sang 
another psalm. On seeing them the crowd chanted 'Welcome, the 
orthodox!' A great disturbance took place, many houses were burned, 
and there were thousands of murders, while the crowd jeered Anastasios 
and called for another emperor and everyone acclaimed Vitalian as 
emperor. As a result Anastasios fled and hid in a suburban estate near 
Blachernai and was abused by Areadne herself for having caused many 
evils to Christians.
  When Alamoundaros, phylarch of the Saracens, had been baptized, 
the impious Severus sent two bishops to win him over to his leprous 
heresy; but, by the providence of God, the man had been
240

baptized by the orthodox who accepted the synod. When Severus' bishops 
attempted to pervert the phylarch from the true teaching, Alamoundaros 
refuted them wonderfully with the following theatrical act. For he said to 
them. 'I received a letter today telling me that the archangel Michael was 
dead.' When they replied that this was impossible, the phylarch continued, 
'How is it then according to you that God alone was crucified, unless 
Christ was of two natures, if even an angel cannot die?' And so Severus' 
bishops departed in ignominy.
  Kabades hamstrung some of the Christians in Persia who later  160 were still 
able to walk.



AM 6006 (AD 513/14]
Year of the divine Incarnation 506
Anastasios, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 23rd year Kabades, 
emperor of the Persians (30 years), 19th year Hormisdas, bishop of Rome 
(10 years), 1st year Timothy, bishop of Constantinople (6 years), 2nd year
242

Helias, bishop of Jerusalem (23 years), 3rd year John, 
bishop of Alexandria (11years), 8th year Severus, bishop of 
Antioch (7 years), 2nd year
   In this year Vitalian, after occupying all of Thrace, Scythia, and Mysia 
and having with him a host of Huns and Bulgars, captured Anchialos and 
Odyssopolis, apprehended Cyril, the magister militum per Thracias, and 
came plundering as far as Byzantium. But he spared the city and encamped 
at Sosthenion. In despair, Anastasios sent some members of the Senate 
inviting him to make peace and swore, along with the Senate, that the 
exiled bishops would be recalled at Herakleia in Thrace. Vitalian added 
that the commanders of each unit of the scholae should also swear this, 
and that Makedonios and Flavian, who had been unjustly expelled, should 
get back their thrones, and likewise all the other bishops, and that then the 
synod be held so that, with the bishop of Rome and all the other bishops 
attending, the outrages against the orthodox would be subjected to a 
common judgement. When the emperor, the Senate, the other magistrates, 
and the army had sworn and guaranteed that this would happen, peace was 
established. And he returned home. The patrician Secundinus, who was the 
brother in law of Anastasios by his sister and the father of Hypatios, fell 
weeping at Vitalian's feet and secured the live release of his son Hypatios 
from imprisonment in Mysia. Hormisdas, the bishop of    161 Rome, prodded 
by	Theuderich, who was acting to please Vitalian, sent the bishop Ennodius 
and the archdeacon Vitalian to the synod that was being convened at 
Herakleia. About 200 bishops came from various places; but, deceived by 
the law breaking emperor and by Timothy, bishop of Constantinople, they 
left without accomplishing anything. For the impious emperor, 
contravening the agreements, secretly instructed the Pope of Rome not to 
attend, although he had sent a rescript to Vitalian who was to forward it to 
Rome calling on the pope to be present at the synod convened at Herakleia. 
All the people and the Senate reviled Anastasios openly as a perjurer. But 
that lawless man shamelessly stated that there was a law commanding the 
emperor to commit perjury and to lie when necessary.
Such were the acts of this utterly lawless follower of Manes.
243



Anastasios, 24th year 
Kabades, 20th year 
Hormisdas, 2nd year 
Timothy, 3rd year Helias, 
4th year
John, 9th year Severus, 3rd 
year
   In this year Vitalian, angered by Anastasios' perjury, inflicted much damage 
on the forces under Anastasios and on the rest of the commonwealth
244


killing, plundering, and disarming people. As a final insult, he sold each soldier for 
a single follis.

AM 6008 (AD 5 15/16]
Year of the divine Incarnation 508
Anastasios, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 25th year 
Kabades, emperor of the Persians (30 years), 21st year 
Hormisdas, bishop of Rome (10 years), 3rd year Timothy, 
bishop of Constantinople (6 years), 4th year Helias, bishop 
of Jerusalem (23 years), 5th year
John, bishop of Alexandria (11years), 10th year Severus, 
bishop of Antioch (7 years), 4th year
   In this year the Huns known as Saber passed through the Caspian 
Gates and overran Armenia, plundering Cappadocia, Galatia, and Pontos, 
so that they almost reached Euchaita. The holy Makedonios, being in 
danger, fled from there and reached safety near Gangra. When Anastasios 
learned of this, he ordered that he be held under the same severe 
conditions there and allegedly sent someone to kill
him. After his death at Gangra, he was buried in the shrine of the	 162    
holy martyr Kallinikos, close to the saints relics, where he performed many acts 
of healing. It is said that Makedonios as he lay
dead, made the sign of the Cross with his hand. Among his companions was 
a certain Theodore, who saw Makedonios in a dream saying to him Take 
this down. Go and read it out to Anastasios and say, I am going to my 
fathers, whose faith I have preserved. But I shall not cease importuning the 
Lord until you have arrived, and we go to be judged together. 
  In the same year a great many men, women, and children in 
Alexandria were seriously afflicted by demons and started howling.
245



Someone saw a terrible spectre in his dreams which said they were suffering 
these ills because of the anathemas [pronounced] against the synod.
Also in the same year the empress Areadne died.
  The monks of the desert, moved by divine zeal, composed four solemn 
declarations of which they sent two to the emperor, one to the authorities of the 
region, and one to John, bishop of Jerusalem. They declared that they would 
neither transgress the holy synod of Chalcedon, nor enter into communion with 
the impious Severus since they were ready to die and even to set fire to the holy 
places. When, out of fear of the emperor, the bishop of Thessalonica made 
communion with Timothy, bishop of Constantinople, forty bishops of Illyricum 
and Greece gathered together and in a written declaration seceded from him, 
their metropolitan, and sent a letter to Rome in which they announced in writing 
that they would be in communion with Rome. Theodore the historian senselessly 
calls the bishop of Thessalonica a patriarch, not knowing the reason.




Anastasios, 26th year 
Kabades, 22nd year 
Hormisdas, 4th year 
Timothy, 5th year Helias, 6th 
year
John, 11th year Severus, 5th 
year
   In this year, on the death of John Nikaiotes, heretical bishop of 
Alexandria, Dioskoros the younger, the nephew of Timothy the Cat, was 
promoted to be bishop of Alexandria. Having come to Byzantium to plead 
before the emperor on behalf of the Alexandrians concerning the murder of 
the son of Kalliopios, the augustalis, he was insulted in public by the 
orthodox as he made his way in procession, since they believed he had 
come to oppose the 163 orthodox doctrine. So once he had completed his 
mission about the murder,
he hastened away again. The cause of the murder was this. When 
Dioskoros was ordained, the mass of the clergy withdrew saying, 'A bishop 
cannot be appointed, except as laid down in the canons of the holy 
apostles.' For it was the magistrates who had enthroned him. Dioskoros 
went to St Mark's and the clergy arrived and invested him a second time 
and ordained him again. And so he came to St John's and celebrated the 
service. As Theodosios, the son of Kalliopios the augustalis, was there, 
and also Akakios, the magister militum, the disorderly crowd began to 
abuse the augustalis for praising the emperor Anastasios. With hatred 
aroused, some jumped in, dragged the son of the augustalis from his seat, 
and killed him. The magister militum Akakios killed as many as he could 
catch. When the emperor heard of this he became angry with them, but 
Dioskoros' mission placated him.
  Between the Indians and the Persians is a fort called Tzoundadeer, 
which Kabades was eager to take because he had learned that there was 
much money there and many precious stones. But demons, which dwelt 
near by, prevented him from capturing it. After he had tried every device 
that his magi and later the Jews could think of, and still not succeeded in his 
object, he was persuaded that he would gain control of it by the prayers of 
the Christians to God. So he made this request to a bishop of the Christians 
in Persia, who, after holding a service and partaking of the holy sacraments, 
went to the place, expelled the demons that were there and effortlessly 
delivered the fort to Kabades. Amazed by this miracle, Kabades honoured 
the bishop by giving him the first seat which, until then, had been
247



occupied by Manichees and Jews, and provided immunity for those who 
wanted to be baptized.


[AM 6010, AD 517/I8)
Anastasios, 27th year 
Kabades, 23rd year 
Hormisdas, 5th year 
Timothy, 6th year Helias, 
7th year
Dioskoros, bishop of Alexandria (3 years), 1st year 
Severus, 6th year
   In this year the emperor Anastasios saw in a vision a terrifying man
164 holding a book which he opened and, having found the emperor's name, 
said to him, 'Behold, because of your erroneous beliefs I am expunging 
fourteen [years].' And he expunged them. Anastasios awoke from his 
sleep, summoned Amantius, the praepositus, and told him about the 
dream. He said, 'I too, saw this night that, while I was standing by your 
Majesty, a great pig came and seized hold of my cloak, knocked me 
down to the ground and killed me.' So he summoned Proklos, the 
interpreter of dreams, and related the vision to him. Proklos said to them, 
'Both of you will die shortly.'
  On the death of Timothy, bishop of Constantinople, the emperor 
appointed John the Cappadocian, a presbyter and synkellos of 
Constantinople, as bishop. Ordained on the third day of Easter, he put 
on the apostolic vestments. The congregation stirred up a great 
disturbance to make John anathematize Severus.
248

  In the same year on 9 April of the 11th indiction Anastasios the impious 
emperor died after ruling for 27 years and 7 months, in the year 234 after 
Diocletian. In his place the pious Justin became emperor, an old and 
experienced man who, beginning as a soldier, had advanced to the Senate, 
an Illyrian by race. Some say that Anastasios, after being struck by a 
divine thunderbolt, went mad.

 
AM 60II (AD 518/19)
Year of the divine Incarnation 511
Justin, emperor of the Romans (9 years), 1st year Kabades, 
emperor of the Persians (30 years), 24th year Hormisdas, bishop 
of Rome (10 years), 6th year
John, bishop of Constantinople (2 years), 1st year Helias, 
bishop of Jerusalem (23 years), 8th year Dioskoros, bishop of 
Alexandria (3 years), 2nd year Severus, bishop of Antioch (7 
years), 7th year
   In this year Justin became emperor and proved excellent in all respects, being 
an ardent champion of the orthodox faith and successful	165 
in battle. His wife's name was Lupicia. The people named
her Euphemia when she was crowned Augusta After Anastasios' death, 
the aforesaid Vitalian was thoroughly reconciled to Justin the elder, so 
much so that he received the rank of magister militum from Justin and, 
after coming to Byzantium, was granted a consular procession. He was 
proclaimed consul and count of the Praesentes and had such influence 
with Justin that he even ordered Severus to be expelled and put to death. 
For Vitalian was strongly orthodox. On hearing this, Severus fled and 
likewise Julian, bishop of Halikarnassos. They went to Egypt, where they 
caused trouble by raising the question of Corruptibility and
249



Incorruptibility; this was while Dioskoros was bishop of Alexandria. 
While John the Cappadocian, bishop of Constantinople, was still alive, 
bishops and clergy came from Rome invested with the authority of 
Hormisdas, the bishop of Rome, and with the support of Vitalian, and 
they inscribed the holy Synod of Chalcedon in their holy diptychs along 
with the three other synods.
  With the impious Severus out of the way, Paul, the xenodochos of the 
hospice of Euboulos, was appointed bishop of Antioch. The emperor 
gave as largess a thousand pounds of gold to the city of Antioch and 
provided law and order to the other cities by curbing disturbances 
among the people. The pious emperor Justin exiled Xenaias, also called 
Philoxenos, bishop of Hierapolis, who was a Manichee, and also Peter of 
Apameia along with all who shared their disease. For plotting to usurp 
the throne he put to death Amantius the praepositus, Andrew the 
cubicularius, and Amantios' comes Theokritos whom Amantios wanted 
to make emperor. For the praepositus had given money to Justin for 
him to distribute so that Theokritos would become emperor. But the 
army and people had not chosen to make Theokritos emperor, but had 
proclaimed
166 Justin. So these men, being vexed, had plotted to usurp the throne and 
were put to death. The emperor recalled all who had been unjustly 
exiled by Anastasios, including the patrician Appian, who had been 
forcibly ordained presbyter at Nicaea. The emperor now appointed him 
praetorian prefect because of his good sense and made Diogenianos 
magister militum per Orientem.
  In the same year a star appeared in the East, a terrifying comet which 
had a ray extending downward. The astronomers described this as 
'bearded'. And there was fear.

250
251

AM 6012 (AD 519/20)
Year of the divine Incarnation 512
Justin, emperor of the Romans (9 years), 2nd year Kabades, emperor of 
the Persians (30 years), 25th year Hormisdas, bishop of Rome (10years), 
7th year
252

John, bishop of Constantinople (2 years), 2nd year Helias, bishop of 
Jerusalem (23 years), 9th year Dioskoros, bishop of Alexandria (3 
years), 3rd year Paul, bishop of Antioch (3 years), 1st year
   In this year Vitalian was murdered by the Byzantines, who were furious 
with him because of the many people he had killed at the time of his uprising 
against Anastasios.
  On the death of John the Cappadocian, bishop of Constantinople, 
Epiphanios, who was a presbyter of the same church and a synkellos, was 
ordained on 25 February. Likewise on the death of Hormisdas of Rome, John 
succeeded to the bishopric.
  In the same year the Blue faction rioted, creating disturbances in all the 
cities and causing stonings and many murders. They even attacked the 
authorities. This evil disorder arose in Antioch and from there spread to all 
[other] cities and lasted for five years. They killed with their swords the 
Greens whom they encountered, going up and murdering even those who 
were hiding at home. The authorities did not dare impose penalties for the 
murders. This went on until the sixth year of the pious Justin.


(AM 6013, AD 520/1)
Justin, 3rd year Kabades, 26th 
year Hormisdas, 8th year
Epiphanios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 1st year Helias, 10th 
year
253


Timothy1 bishop of Alexandria (17 years)1 1st year
Paul 2nd year
   In this year when a war broke out between Romans and Persians, Justin 
dispatched envoys and gifts to Zilgbi king of the Huns 2 who made a pact of alliance 
with the emperor against the Persians, [swearing] by his ancestral oaths. Kouades 
likewise sent [emissaries] to him and Zilgbi made a pact with him too. When Justin 
learned of this1 he was exceedingly displeased. Zilgbi went over to the Persians with 
twenty thousand men to make war on the Romans. In making peace overtures Justin 
revealed to Kouades, emperor of the Persians in a letter purportedly devoted to some 
other matter that Zilgbi had sworn oaths of alliance with the Romans had received 
many gifts and intended to betray the Persians. It is necessary, he added 'that we, as 
brothers, become friends and are not made the sport of these dogs.' Kouades asked 
Zilgbi in private whether he had been set against the Persians after receiving gifts 
from the Romans. He replied, 'Yes'. So Kouades killed him in anger and during the 
night sent a body of Persians which destroyed his host since he suspected that they 
had come to him treacherously. As many as were able to escape returned to their 
home land.
   Euphrasios of Antioch removed from the diptychs both the Synod of Chalcedon 
and the name of Hormisdas, the Pope of Rome. Afterwards in fear he proclaimed the 
four synods.
   Kabades, the emperor of the Persians decided to leave the Roman emperor as 
guardian of his household. For he wanted neither his eldest son to rule, whom 
Persian law summoned to hold office, nor yet his second son since one of his eyes 
had been cut out, but Chosroes, whom he loved greatly and who was his son by 168 
Aspebedes' sister. He resolved, therefore to make peace with the Romans so that 
Chosroes would become the emperor1s adoptive son. To this end he sent envoys to 
Justin at Byzantium. The emperor summoned the Senate to consider this but did not 
accept the proposal, since the senators, led by the good counsel of Proklos the 
quaestor an intelligent and shrewd man1 described this as a trick and a betrayal of 
the Romans.
254



25 5





Justin, 4th year Kabades, 
27th year Hormisdas, 9th 
year Epiphanios, 2nd year 
Helias, 11th year Timothy, 
2nd year Paul, 3rd year
   In this year Dyrrachium, a city of New Epirus in illyricum, suffered from 
divine anger. The emperor provided much money for the restoration of the 
city. Likewise Corinth, the metropolis of Greece, [suffered] and the emperor 
showed great generosity towards it.

\



Justin, 5th year Kabades, 
28th year Hormisdas, 10th 
year Epiphanios, 3rd year 
Helias, 12th year Timothy, 
3rd year
Euphrasios, bishop of Antioch (5 years), 1st year
   In this year Tzathios, emperor of the Lazi, revolted from the empire of 
the Persians during the reign of Kabades, who so loved Tzathios that he 
had promoted him to be emperor of the Lazi. Tzathios came to Justin at 
Byzantium and urged the emperor to make him a Christian and let him be 
proclaimed emperor of the Lazi by Justin. The emperor received him with 
joy, baptized him, and proclaimed him as his son. Tzathios married a 
Roman wife, a certain Valeriana, the granddaughter of the patrician and 
former curopalates Nomos, and took her back to his own land after being 
appointed emperor of the Lazi by Justin. He wore a crown and a white 
imperial cloak with a gold panel, on which the image of the emperor 
Justin was depicted in embroidery, and also a white tunic with golden 
embroidery and an image of the emperor, while his boots were red,
decorated with pearls in the Persian fashion. Likewise his belt was	169 
gold, decorated with pearls. He received many gifts from the emperor 
and returned joyfully to his own country. When Kabades, the emperor of 
the Persians, learned of this, he announced to the emperor that 'While 
peace and friendship exist between us, you are perpetrating hostile acts by 
taking to yourself those who have been subject to the dominion of Persia 
from time immemorial.' The emperor declared to him in return, 'We have 
neither taken nor put pressure on anyone subject to your empire; but 
Tzathios came to our palace and, prostrating himself before us, begged to be 
delivered from the abominable pagan teaching, from impious sacrifices 
and the deceit of demons, and to come over to God, the creator of the world, 
and to become a Christian. After baptizing him, we have sent him away to 
his own country.' Thereafter there was hostility between Romans and 
Persians.
257



  In the same year the deeds concerning the holy Arethas and those in the city 
of Negra were perpetrated by the Homerites, and war was undertaken by 
Elasbaas, emperor of the Ethiopians, against the Homerites, and he was 
victorious.

258




Justin, 6th year Kabades, 
29th year
John, bishop of Rome (3 years), 1st year 
Epiphanios, 4th year Helias, 
13th year Timothy, 4th year 
Euphrasios, 2nd year
   In this year Theuderich, the Arian who ruled Rome, compelled Pope 
John to go to Byzantium to the emperor Justin and to intercede for the 
Arians so that they would not be obliged to give up their heresy; for 
Theuderich was threatening to do the same to the orthodox in Italy. After 
arriving in Byzantium John, when urged by the patriarch Epiphanios, did 
not consent until the bishop of Rome was given precedence over 
Epiphanios. John was in communion with all the bishops but not with 
Timotheos of Alexandria.
  Kouades, the son of Perozes, the emperor of the Persians, in a single day 
destroyed thousands upon thousands of Manichees along with their bishop, 
Indazaros, and including the Persian senators
who were of their persuasion. For his third son, named 170
Phthasouarsan, whom his daughter Sambike had borne to him, had been 
brought up by the Manichees and won over to their views. They declared 
to him, 'Your father has grown old and if he happens to die, the chief magi 
will make one of your brothers emperor so that their own teaching should 
prevail. We are able, however, by our prayers to persuade your father to 
abdicate from the empire and to assign it to you, so that you may 
strengthen the teaching of the Manichees everywhere.' He agreed to do this 
if he became emperor. Having been informed of it, Kouades ordered an 
assembly to be held for the alleged purpose of making his son 
Phthasouarsan emperor, and ordered all the Manichees to be present at the 
assembly along with their bishop, their women, and children, and likewise 
the chief magus Glonazes and the magi and also the bishop of the 
Christians Boazanes, who was loved by Kouades for being an excellent
259



physician. Having summoned the Manichees he said, 'I rejoice at your 
teaching and, while I am still alive, I want to give the empire to my son 
Phthasouarsan, who is of one mind with you. But set your­ selves apart to 
receive him.' Encouraged by this, they stood apart with confidence. 
Kouades ordered his soldiers to enter and they cut down with their swords 
all the Manichees including their bishop before the eyes of the chief 
magus and the bishop of the Christians. He dispatched ordinances to all 
territory subject to him that anyone discovered to be a Manichee was to 
be put to death and burned by fire, their property was to be confiscated 
by the royal treasury, and their books were to be destroyed by fire.
  The pious emperor Justin, who was administering his empire with 
complete proficiency and courage, dispatched ordinances to the cities 
everywhere, that all those who were causing disorder or committing 
murders were to be punished, and he brought peace to the people in 
Constantinople and showed he was to be greatly feared. He crowned his 
own wife Theodora as Augusta as soon as he had
171   become emperor. He appointed the patrician Hypatios, the son of 
Secundinus, as magister militum per Orientem to guard the eastern regions 
against the Persians and the incursions of the Saracens. He himself carried 
out a great persecution of the Manichees and punished many.


260

261



AM 6017 [AD 524/ 5)
Year of the divine Incarnation 517
Justin, emperor of the Romans (9 years), 7th year Kabades, emperor 
of the Persians (30 years), 30th year John, bishop of Rome (3 
years), 2nd year
Epiphanios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 5th year Helias, 
bishop of Jerusalem (23 years), 14th year Timothy, bishop of 
Alexandria (17 years), 5th year Euphrasios, bishop of Antioch (5 
years), 3rd year
   In this year Anazarbos, the metropolis of Second Cilicia, suffered from a most 
terrifying earthquake, its governor being Kalliopios, son of Eirenaios, and the entire 
city collapsed. Justin raised it up again and named it Justinoupolis. In the same 
year Edessa, a large and famous city, the metropolis of the province of 
Osrhoene, was engulfed through divine anger by the waters of its river. For the river 
Skirtos which passes through the midst of it, provides it with great wealth and 
enjoyment. At that time, being in full flood like a sea, it dragged away the houses 
along with their inhabitants and sub­ merged them. There is a story current among 
those who were saved that the same river had destroyed the city on other occasions 
but not to the same degree. After the floods had ended, a stone tablet was found 
on the bank of the river inscribed with the following message in hieroglyphic 
lettering: 'The river Skirtos will skittishly skittle the citizens.' The emperor Justin 
provided much towards the restoration of both cities.
  In the same year there appeared a giant like woman from Cilicia, who 
surpassed in stature every full grown man by a cubit and was extremely broad. 
She travelled round the cities and received one follis from each shop.

262



(AM 6018, AD 525/6]
Justin, 8th year
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (48 years), 1st year 
John, 3rd year Epiphanios, 
6th year Helias, 15th year 
Timothy, 6th year 
Euphrasios, 4th year
   In this year in October of the 4th indiction 2 the prelude to God's	172 
anger visited the city of Antioch. For a great conflagration 
arrived unseen in the middle of the city, which foretold the coming 
threat from God. The fire was kindled at the martyrium of St Stephen and 
extended as far as the Praetorium of the magister militum. This was the 
beginning of anguish.  The fires lasted for six months, many houses 
were burned, and many people perished. No one was able to discover from 
where the fire was lit; for it flared up from the roof tiles of five-storey 
buildings. By the mediation of the patriarch Euphrasios the emperor 
granted to the city two centenaria of gold. On 20 May of the same 4th 
indiction, at the seventh hour, while Olybrius was consul in Rome, 
Antioch, the great city of Syria, suffered inexplicable disaster through 
God's anger. So great was the wrath of God towards it that almost the 
entire city collapsed and became a tomb for its inhabitants. Some of 
those who were buried and still alive beneath the ground were burned by 
fire that came out of the earth. Another fire came down out of the air like 
sparks and burned whomever it touched, like lightning. The earth went 
on shaking for a year.













 
Year of the divine Incarnation 519
Justin, emperor of the Romans (9 years), 9th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (48 years), 2nd year 
Felix, bishop of Rome (4 years), 1st year
Epiphanios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 7th year Helias, 
bishop of Jerusalem (23 years), 16th year Timotheos, bishop of 
Alexandria  (17 year) 7th year Euphrasios, bishop of Antioch (5 
years), 5th year
   In this year, while the earthquake continued, Euphrasios, the bishop of 
Antioch, was engulfed by the earthquake and perished. Every house and church 
collapsed and the beauty of the city was destroyed. In all the generations no 
such great anger of God had
173	befallen any other city. On learning this, the most pious emperor Justin 
was so greatly grieved in his soul that he took off both the diadem
 from his head and the purple and mourned in sackcloth for many days, 
so that when he went to church on a feast day he refused to wear the crown 
or the chlamys, but went dressed very plainly in a purple mantle and wept 
in the presence of  the whole  Senate. Everybody wept and wore 
mourning like him. The emperor immediately dispatched the comes 
Carinus, giving him five centenaria for excavation, in case anyone could 
be saved, and to preserve what had been buried from robbers and looters. 
To follow him up, he sent the patrician Phokas, the son of Krateros, and the 
patrician Asterios, the ex prefect, both learned men, giving them a great 
quantity of money for the renewal of the city. On April of the same 5th 
indiction, on the feast of Easter, the emperor Justin, being
264



















ill, appointed his own nephew Justinian to be emperor while 
he, [Justin,] was still alive, and crowned him. He ruled jointly 
with Justinian for four months. In August of the same 5th 
indiction the most pious Justin died, leaving Justinian  
emperor.
  On the death of Euphrasios, bishop of Antioch, Ephraim of Amida, who 
was comes of the East at that time, was ordained in his place, a man who 
showed divine zeal against the schismatics.
  
  
  
  
AM 6020 (AD 527/8)	I74
Year of the divine Incarnation 520
Justinian, emperor of the Romans ( 38 years),  1st year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians ( 48 years), 3rd year 
Felix, bishop of Rome ( 4 years), 2nd year
Epiphanios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 8th year
265




Helias, bishop of Jerusalem (23 years), nth year Timothy, 
bishop of Alexandria (17 years), 8th year Ephraim, bishop 
of Antioch (18 years), lSt year
I IIn this year Justinian the elder became sole emperor. 1 He appointed 
Patricius the Armenian 2 as comes Orientis, provided him with money 
and ordered him to go out and restore Palmyra, as it is called, a city of 
Phoenice Libanensis, situated on the inner limes.3 He also gave orders 
that the dux be stationed there*4 the Holy Places.J Ja
  l l On l January of the same indiction the emperor distributed a 
greater sum in consular largess than any previous emperor.J i b
  I IIn the same year the emperor of the Persians made war on 
Tzathios the Laz for joining the Romans.5 Thereupon the emperor 
Justinian sent him a detachment of troops and three magistri mili­ tum, 
Belisarius, 6 Kerykos, and Eirenaios, who gave battle and lost.7 The 
emperor was annoyed with the generals because their mutual 
resentment had cost the victory. Af ter dismissing them, he sent out his 
notary, Peter,8 as magister militum. Peter along with the Lazi engaged 
the Persians, defeated them, and killed many Persians.J Jc9
  I IIn the same year, Gretes, emperor of the Elours, joined the 
Romans. 10 He came to Constantinople with his host and sought per-
175 mission from the emperor to become a Christian. The emperor bap­ tized 
him at Epiphany, acting as his sponsor in baptism. His counsellors and 
twelve of his relatives were baptized with him. Gretes went back to his 
own country, happy at having won the emperor's friendship, and 
promising to fight as an aJly whenever he was wanted.I l a
  I !The emperor appointed Tzitas as magister militum per Armeniam, 
11 a warlike and very capable man. For Armenia had not had a magister 
militum, only duces and comites.12 A force of Armenians was 
conscripted to serve under him, since they knew the regions of Armenia. 
The emperor gave Tzitas four numeri from the eastern army, so 
establishing great safety and succour for the Romans. He also gave 
Kometo, the Augusta Theodora's sister, to Tzitas in marriage.J Je
  I IIn the same year a woman named Boarex 13 joined the Romans. 
She was one of the Saber Huns, as they are called, a barbarian and a 
widow. She led 100,000 Huns and had ruled the Bunnie territory after the 
death of her husband Balach. Af ter two kings of another race of Huns 
further inland, called Styrax and Clones, had been persuaded by 
Kouades, emperor of the Persians, to join him in an alliance against the 
Romans, Boarex took them as they were marching with their 20,000 
across her territory towards Persia. She cut them down,

266

made prisoner one of the kings, called Styrax, and sent him to the emperor 
in Constantinople, and slew the other, Glones, in battle. So she became an 
ally, at peace with the emperor Justinian.
  In the same year the king of the Huns near Bosphoros, called Gordas 
joined the emperor, became a Christian, and was baptized. The emperor 
received him, provided him with many gifts, and sent him back to his own 
country to guard Roman territory and the city of Bosphoros. This city 
received its name through paying its annual tribute to the Romans in cattle 
instead of money, (that is, cattle tax city.
The emperor established a numerus of Ro)man soldiers there under
a tribune to guard the city because of the Huns, and to exact the cattle  176 tax. 
In this city there were many transactions between Romans
and Huns. After the king of the Huns who had become a Christian 
returned to his own country, he found his brother and told him of the 
emperor's love and liberality and that he had become a Christian. He then 
took the statues that the Huns worshipped and melted them down, for they 
were made of silver and electrum. Enraged, the Huns united with his 
brother, went away and killed Gordas, and made his brother Mouageris 
king in his place. Then, in fear that the Romans might seek him out, they 
fell suddenly on the city of Bosphoros and killed the tribune Dalmatius and 
his soldiers. At this news the emperor sent out the ex-consul John, the 
grandson of John the Scythian and son of the patrician Rufinus, with a large 
Scythian force, and at the same time directed against the Huns Godilas, 
[who marched] by land from Odyssopolis, and the general Badourios. On 
hearing this, the Huns fled and disappeared. Peace came to Bosphoros which 
the Romans now ruled without fear.
  

  The emperor Justinian took away all the churches of the heretics and 
gave them to the orthodox Christians. An exception was made of the 
Exakionite Arians.
  The emperor Justinian issued an edict concerning bishops, oikonomoi, 
heads of orphanages, and hospice keepers, that they were not to leave any 
inheritance; only such property as they held prior to taking office were 
they able to bequeath. From the time of their appointment they would not 
have the right to make any testamentary dispositions but the ecclesiastical 
house was to inherit all their goods. 
  The same emperor completed the public bath in the quarter of 
Dagistheos,  which the emperor Anastasios had begun, and also made the 
inner court of the basilica of Illos into a large cistern. 


268
AM 6021 (AD 528/9)	177
Year of the divine Incarnation 521
Justinian, emperor of the Romans ( 38 years), 2nd year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (48 years), 4th year Felix, 
bishop of Rome (4 years), 3d year
Epiphanios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 9th year Helias, 
bishop of Jerusalem (23 years), 18th year Timothy, bishop of 
Alexandria (17 years), 9th year Ephraim, bishop of Antioch (18 
years), 2nd year
In this year Hesaias, bishop of Rhodes, and Alexander, bishop of 
Diospolis in Thrace, were deposed on being convicted of pederasty and 
punished terribly by the emperor. They were castrated and paraded publicly 
while the crier shouted out, 'As bishops, you are not to abuse your holy 
dress.' The emperor introduced harsh laws
269



against licentious behaviour, and many were punished. This produced 
considerable fear and security.
  The pious emperor restored all the ancient laws and published them 
in a single book entitled 'The New Constitutions'. In them he forbids a 
magistrate to buy property in the area of his jurisdiction, to build a 
house or inherit from another person unless he happens to be a relative.
  In the same year on Wednesday 29 November in the third hour, 
indiction 71 Great Antioch again suffered from divine anger, two years 
after its first disaster. The great earthquake lasted for one hour and there 
was a terrifying roar from heaven. All the buildings fell to the ground, 
even the walls as well; and those old buildings that had not fallen in the 
first earthquake now collapsed. All the magnificence with which the 
city had been invested through acts of generosity by the emperor and 
through the buildings erected by citizens at their own expense, was all 
destroyed. When the neighbouring cities heard about it, they held 
litanies in mourning. 4,870 people perished in the collapse. The survivors 
fled to other cities and began living in huts in the mountains. Then came 
a harsh and very severe winter. Those who remained went on 
processions 178   in prayer, all of them barefoot, weeping, throwing 
themselves headlong into the snow and crying out, 'Lord, have mercy!' It 
was revealed in a vision to one pious man that he should tell all the 
survivors to write on the lintels of their doors 'Christ is with us. Stand.' 
When this was done, God's anger ceased. Again the emperor and the 
Augusta provided much money towards restoration and rebuilding in 
the city of Antioch. He changed its name to Theoupolis.
  On 21 March of the 7th indiction, Alamoundaros son of Zekike, kinglet 
of the Saracens, invaded and looted First Syria as far as the boundaries 
of Antioch, at a place called Litargon, and the estates of Skaphathai. He 
killed many people and burned the territory outside Chalcedon and the 
Sermian estate and the Kynegian country. The news brought the Roman 
commanders out against him. When they realized this, the Saracens, 
with the Persians, took their booty and prisoners and fled across the 
inner limes.
  In April of the same 7th indiction, a detachment of the army dispatched 
by the emperor, plus the infantry of the so called Lykokranitai from 
Phrygia, arrived. The emperor appointed Belisarius as magister militum 
per Orientem to succeed the patrician Hypatios, son of Secundinus On 
May the magister Hermogenes the Scythian arrived in Antioch. He was 
a learned man and had been sent as an envoy by the emperor Justinian to 
discuss peace with the emperor of the Persians.
270


  In June the Samaritans and Jews in Palestine crowned a certain Julian as 
emperor and took up arms against the Christians, against whom they 
committed robbery, murder, and arson. God delivered them into the hands 
of Justinian. He destroyed them all and beheaded the usurper Julian. 
  The magister Hermogenes, who had brought gifts with him on his 
peace mission, was received in July of the same 7th indiction by 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians, who accepted the gifts but
refused to make peace, since he had been influenced by Samaritan 179 fugitives 
who promised to hand over their country to him, that is all
of Palestine, claiming they had as allies Jews and Samaritans totalling 
50,000 men. Trusting them, Chosroes rejected peace. Through them he 
hoped to capture great Jerusalem, with its countless centenaria of gold and 
its many precious stones. He made the gold-mines in the mountains of 
Armenia his pretext. Earlier they had paid a talent in tribute to both 
Romans and Persians, but now this was being paid to the Romans alone. 
He wrote to the emperor raising some other matters as well by way of 
excuse. But the intrigue of the Samaritans was discovered and they were 
arrested at Ammadios on their return journey from Persia. These were five 
rich Samaritans who were handed over to Belisarius, the magister militum. 
After questioning they revealed the whole story.
  In the same period, the dux of Palestine quarrelled with the phyl­ arch of 
the Saracens subject to the Romans. The phylarch went in fear to the inner 
limes. When Alamoundaros heard about this, he went in pursuit, captured 
him and killed him, took his women and children, and returned. At this 
the duces of Phoenicia, Arabia, and Mesopotamia plus the phylarch went 
chasing after him. When he heard this, Alamoundaros fled to Indian 
territory where none of the Romans had ever been. The Romans captured 
the Saracen tents and took many of them prisoner, men, women, and 
children, and as many Roman prisoners as they found, plus camels, sheep, 
oxen, and much silk and clothing. In addition they burned four Persian 
forts, and then returned after a great victory.

271

272
273



180	AM 6022 [AD 529/30)
Year of the divine Incarnation 522
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (38 years), 3rd year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (48 years), 5th year 
Felix, bishop of Rome (4 years), 4th year
Epiphanios, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 10th year 
Helias, bishop of Jerusalem (23 years), 19th year
Timothy, bishop of Alexandria (17 years), 10th year Ephraim, 
bishop of Antioch (18 years), 3rd year
   In this year, indiction 8, the emperor Justinian carried out a great 
persecution against the pagans and every heresy and confiscated their 
property. The ex-referendarius Makedonios was denounced and also 
the ex-prefect Asklepiodotos who, in fear, took poison and died. 
Pegasios of Helioupolis was tried by the courts along with his 
children. Among others, the patrician Phokas, son of Krateros, and the 
quaestor Thomas were arrested, and there was great fear. The emperor 
decreed that pagans and heretics could not hold civic office, but only 
orthodox Christians [could do so]. He gave them a period of three 
months to convert.
  In March, of the same 8th indiction, Hermogenes, the ex consul 
and magister, and Rufinus, the ex-magister militum and patrician, 
[came] to Antioch on an embassy to Persia. When they reached Daras, 
they sent a message to the emperor of the Persians that he should 
receive them. While they remained at Daras along with Belisarius, 
magister militum per Orientem, and the other Roman commanders, 
being encamped a short distance outside the city, news of it reached 
Meram, the Persian emperor's foremost general, who was in Nisibis 
with a large Persian force, together with the
181   emperor's son and the remaining Persian generals. In June of the 8th 
indiction he attacked, dividing his own force into three sections. At this 
news the Roman generals along with the magister set out on a skilful 
campaign against the Persians, and there was a great battle and a 
terrible clash. The Romans struck down the Persians and destroyed 
them, even capturing their standard. Meram and the son of the Persian 
emperor and a few survivors escaped to Nisibis. So the Romans won a 
great victory. When the Persian emperor learned the news, he ordered 
the patrician Rufinus to approach him accompanied
274


only by the comes Alexander. They made their entry in August, and, after 
much discussion, established the terms of peace and departed peacefully.


(AM] 6023 [AD 530/1)
[Year of the divine Incarnation] 523 Justinian, 4th 
year
Chosroes, 6th year
Boniface, bishop of Rome (2 years), 1st year 
Epiphanios,	11th year 
Helias, 20th year Timothy, 
11th year Ephraim, 4th year
   In September of this year in the 9th indiction, there appeared an enormous 
and frightening star in the west. It was a comet that sent
275



upward its flashing rays. People called it the Torch and it continued to shine 
for twenty days. All over the world riots and murders occurred. 
      At the end of November 4 the patrician Rufinus returned to the 
emperor Justinian from his embassy to Persia, having fixed the terms of peace. 
The emperor received him and was very pleased with the peace and rejoiced 
at the appointed terms. So there was peace in the affairs of both [states].

(AM) 6024 (AD 531/2)
[Year of the divine Incarnation] 524 Justinian, 5th year
Chosroes, 7th year 
Boniface, 2nd year 
Epiphanios, 12th year 
Helias, 21st year Timothy, 
12th year Ephraim, 5th year
In this year, the 5th of Justinian's reign, in January of the 10th indiction, 
occurred the so-called Nika revolt. The members of the circus
276

  factions crowned as emperor Hypatios, the relative3 of the emperor 
Anastasios. A large part of the city was burned, including the Great Church, St 
Eirene, the hospice of Sampson, the Augustaion, the portico of the Basilica, and 
the Bronze House of the palace. There was great panic and many of those found 
in the Hippodrome with Hypatios perished-the number reported is 35,000. The 
Nika riot occurred in the following way. The factions went up into the 
Hippodrome and the Greens began to shout acclamations about Kalopodios  the 
cubicularius and spatharios.
Greens: Long may you live, Justinian Augustus! Tu vincas!                   182
wronged, 0 paragon of virtue, and cannot endure it, as God knows. I am afraid to give his name in 
case he prospers the more, and I put myself in danger.
Herald:  Who is he? I do not know.
Greens: My oppressor, thrice august, can be found in the shoemakers' quarter.
Herald: No one does you wrong.
Greens: One man and one man only does me wrong. Mother of God, may he 
not hold his head up high.
Herald: We do not know who he is.
Greens: You and you alone know, thrice august, who oppresses me today.
Herald: Come now, if there is someone, we do not know him. Greens: 
Kalopodios, the spatharios, does me wrong, 0 lord of all. Herald: Kalopodios is not 
at fault.
Greens: Whoever he is, he will share the fate of Judas. God will speedily exact a 
penalty from my oppressor.
Herald: You have not come here to watch, but only to insult your rulers.
Greens: Surely anyone who wrongs me will share the fate of Judas.
Herald: Silence, you Jews, Manichaeans, and Samaritans!
Greens: Do you call us Jews and Samaritans? May the Mother of God be with 
everyone.
Herald: How long are you going to curse yourselves?
Greens: If anyone denies that our lord is orthodox, let him be anathema, like 
Judas.
Herald: I am  telling you: Get baptized in one [God].
The Greens shouted above each other and chanted, as Antlas demanded, 'I am baptized 
in one [God].'
Herald: Surely, if you do not keep quiet, I shall behead you.
Greens: Everyone tries to get office for security. So whatever we say in our 
distress, Your Majesty should not get angry, for deity endures everything.
277


      [Herald:]
Greens: We have a case, emperor, and we shall now name everything. 
We do not know even where the palace is, thrice august, nor where is 
the state ceremonial. I come only once to the City
183	when I am seated on a mule. And I would rather not then, thrice august.
Herald: Every free man can go where he likes in public without danger.
Greens: To be sure, I am a free man, but I am not allowed to show it. 
For if a free man is suspected of being a Green, he is sure to be 
punished in public.
Herald: Are you ready to die then, and will you not spare your own 
lives?
Greens: Let this colour be removed and justice disappears. Stop the 
murdering and let us face punishment. See here a gushing fountain; 
punish as many as you like. Truly, man's nature cannot bear these two 
things. Would that Sabbatios had not been born, so he would not have 
had a murderer for a son. It is the twenty-sixth murder that has taken 
place in the Zeugma. A spectator in the morning and murdered in the 
afternoon, lord of all.
Blues: The only murderers in the whole stadium are yours.
Greens: You kill and run away.
Blues: You kill and walk about [freely]. The only murderers in the 
stadium are yours.
Greens: Lord Justinian, they are asking for it and yet no one is killing them. 
Whoever wants to will understand. The wood seller, the one in the 
Zeugma, who killed him, emperor?
Herald: You yourselves killed him.
Greens: Who killed the son of Epagathos, emperor?
Herald: You yourselves killed him, and now you are involving the 
Blues.
Greens: Now, now, have pity 0 Lord. Truth is being suppressed. I want 
to quarrel with those who say events are controlled by God. For what 
is the source of this misery?
Herald: God cannot be tempted with evil.
Greens: God cannot be tempted with evil? But who does me wrong? If 
there is a philosopher  or hermit here, let him explain the difference.
Herald: You God hated blasphemers, will you never be silent?
Greens: If it pleases Your Majesty, I shall keep quiet, but against my will, 
thrice august. I know it all, every bit of it and I say nothing. Farewell, 
Justice, you exist no more. I shall tum and become a Jew. Better to be a 
pagan than a Blue, God knows.

Blues: I hate it. I do not want to see it. Your malice is galling.
Greens: Let the bones of the spectators be dug up! 	184
  The Greens departed and left the emperor and the Blues as spectators. And 
immediately a pretext for a faction riot was offered by some officials in the 
following way. The prefect arrested three partisans among the trouble makers and 
had them hanged. One died immediately, but the other two fell from the gibbet. 
They were hanged again, and again fell. The crowd of bystanders saw them and 
chanted, 'Get them to the church!' The monks of St Konon heard, carried them 
to a small boat and took them across to St Laurence, as that church had the 
privilege that no one was to be ejected from it until such time as he had suffered 
sufficiently. On hearing of this, the prefect sent soldiers to guard them. When 
the partisans learned of this, they went off to the Praetorium and asked the prefect to 
remove the soldiers on guard at St Laurence. They got no reply from him, so, 
enraged, they set fire to the Praetorium. The porticoes from the arch of the Forum 
to the Chalke were burned, and also the shops of the silversmiths and the whole 
palace of Lausos were destroyed by fire. They killed unsparingly the soldiers 
who attacked them. Then they broke into houses and began to loot their contents. 
They set fire to the entrance of the palace (the one with the bronze roof), the 
portico of the Protectores, and the senate house by the Augustaion. The 
partisans went down to the Julian harbour (I mean that of Sophia), to the palace 
of Probus in search of weapons, crying 'Another emperor for the city!' They set 
fire to the palace of Probus which was gutted. Next they went and burned the 
baths of Alexander, the great hospice of Sampson (where the patients perished), 
and the Great Church along with all its columns. It collapsed entirely on all four 
sides.
The emperor, in terror, wanted to load his moneys on to a dromon
and get away as far as Herakleia in Thrace, leaving the magister militum 
Moundos  to guard the palace, along with Moundos' son,
3,000 men, Konstantiolos and the cubicularii. The partisans 		 185
dragged away the corpses and tossed them into the sea, also killing a large 
number of women. When a rumour had got around that the emperor had taken 
the Augusta and left for Thrace, they proclaimed the patrician Hypatios 
emperor, and as he sat in the Hippodrome, he was acclaimed by the partisans 
and listened to the insulting jeers directed against the emperor Justinian. Two 
hundred young Greens in armour came from Flacillianai  intending to open 
the palace and bring Hypatios in.
  The emperor, when he heard of these bold moves by the partisans and by Hypatios, 
went into the palace and up to the Pulpita (as they


are called), behind the Kathisma of the Hippodrome, to the dining­ 
room with the bronze doors. He had with him Moundos, 
Konstantiolos, Belisarius, and other senators plus a detachment of 
armed soldiers, cubicularii, and spatharioi. The cubicularius Narses 
went out and won over some of the Blue faction by a distribution of 
money. They began chanting, 'Justinian Augustus, tu vincas! Lord, 
preserve Justinian the emperor and Theodora the Augusta!' The crowd 
was split and people began attacking one another. Those in the palace 
went out with their forces, detached some people from the partisans, 
and rushed into the Hippodrome, Narses by the gates, Moundos' son by 
the Sphendone, others by the narrow passage from the imperial box 
into the arena. They started slaying the partisans, some with their 
bows, others with their swords: in the end not one of the citizens, either 
of the Greens or of the Blues, who were in the Hippodrome, survived. 
Belisarius ran into the Kathisma with a number of spatharioi, arrested 
Hypatios, led him to the emperor, and had him put in prison.
  The day's casualties amounted to 35,000. No partisan was to be seen 
any longer; indeed on that day peace was restored. On the next day 
Hypatios and his brother Pompeius were executed. Their bodies were 
thrown into the sea and their estates were confiscated. A further 
eighteen patricians, illustres, and consulars had their
186.	186	property confiscated as associates of Hypatios. This produced 
considerable fear and the city calmed down. The chariot races were not 
held for a long time.
  In the same year there occurred a great movement of stars from 
evening till dawn. Everyone was terrified and said, 'The stars are 
falling, and we have never seen such a thing as that before.
280
281

282
283

284

(AM] 6025 (AD 532/3)
[Year of the divine Incarnation] 525 Justinian, 6th year
John, bishop of Rome ( 3 years), 1st year 
Epiphanios, 13th year                                                                                
Helias, 22nd year Timothy, l 3th year 
Ephraim, 6th year
 n this year, Theodora, the most pious Augusta, journeyed to the hot springs of 
Pythia to take the waters. She was accompanied by the patrician Menas (the 
prefect), the patrician Helias, who was comes largitionum, and other patricians, 
cubicularii, and satraps, a total of 4,000. She showed much liberality to the 
churches, poorhouses, and monasteries.
 



[Year of the divine Incarnation] 526 Justinian, 
7th year
Chosroes, 9th year John, 
2nd year Epiphanios, 
14th year Helias, 23rd 
year Timothy, 14th year 
Ephraim, 7th year
   In this year Priscus, the consul and emperor's ex-notary, earned the 
displeasure of the empress Theodora. His property was confiscated and 
he was ordained deacon of Kyzikos by the emperor's command.
  In the same year the Vandalic Wars began and Belisarius conquered 
Africa. The Vandals, under their king Godigisklos, as related for an 
earlier period, took hold of Spain during the rule of Arkadios and 
Honorius, and then crossed over from there to Libya, which they 
occupied. After the death of Godigisklos, his sons Gogdaris and Gizerich 
succeeded to the throne. After Gogdaris had died,   Gizerich was 
appointed emperor of the Vandals, and ruled the city of Carthage for 39 
years during which he even captured Rome. On his death his son 
Onorich, succeeded to his empire and caused much harm to the 
Christians in Libya, compelling them to become Arians. He killed many; 
others had their tongues cut out of their
186.	187	throats, but by the grace of God they were later able to speak. But the
286
     







	    



Moors, who felt contempt for the Vandals, made war on them and did them 
much harm. Onorich died after eight years' rule, having lost Numidia and 
Mount Aurasion, which were no longer subject to the Vandals. 
Goundamoundos, the son of Geezon, son of Gizerich, succeeded to the throne 
and did greater harm to the Christians. He died after twelve years of rule. 
He was succeeded by Trasamoundos, a handsome, intelligent and 
magnanimous man. He forced the Christians to abandon their ancestral faith, 
not by torture, but by showing disfavour to those who would not comply. After 
his wife had died childless, he took wise counsel and sent a message to Spain 
to Theuderich, emperor of the Goths, requesting to marry the latter's sister 
Amalafrida, who was a widow. Theuderich gave him his sister in marriage, 
and also sent one thousand reliable Goths as a bodyguard, with five thousand 
other fighting men to support them. Theuderich made a gif t to his sister of 
one of the promontories of Sicily called Lysion, and, as a result, 
Trasamoundos appeared to be the most powerful and strongest of all who 
had reigned among the Libyans. He became the friend of the emperor 
Anastasios, and ruled his empire for 27 years. On his death, Ilderich,  son 
of Onorich and grandson of Gizerich, ruled, a gentle and good man, who was 
not even harsh towards the Christians. But he was excessively soft in matters 
of war and was unwilling even to hear about the subject. Amergous, his 
nephew, a good man in war-they called him Achilles-was commander in 
chief of the Vandals. Ilderich was a friend of Justinian before the latter 
had become emperor, that is in the days of his uncle Justin, and used to send 
him and receive in return large sums of money, strengthening the friendship. 
But among Ilderich's relatives, was Gelimer, a member of Gizerich's 
family, a terrible and wicked man, well versed
in revolution and in taking other people's money. He seized power	188 
from his own lord Ilderich, who had ruled for seven years. He arrested and 
imprisoned Ilderich and his wife Amalafrida, destroyed all the Goths, and held 
Amer and Amer's brother Euagees
in prison. Emboldened by his usurpation, he was unable to live in the 
established manner. So he wrote to the emperor Justinian in defence of 
his actions, claiming that the empire lawfully belonged to him and that 
Ilderich lacked the strength to govern it. To which Justinian replied that 
he would not recognize this usurpation. Gelimer, paying no attention to 
this reply, blinded Amer and locked up Ilderich and Euagees in a stronger 
prison. 
  Thereupon Justinian began a campaign against Libya, having ended the 
Persian War, and recalling Belisarius from the East, made his plans. The 
Senate was adverse, recalling the emperor Leo's
287



expedition against the Vandals which had been led by Basiliskos and had 
been destroyed with severe casualties and waste of much money. The 
Senate now feared the degree of the risk involved should the emperor 
choose one [of them] as general of this campaign. John the patrician  
came forward and made the following speech:
'We, my lord, obey your commands and do not strive against them. But it 
is proper for you to consider the distance involved. There is a vast expanse 
of sea, while the journey by land takes 140 days. [Consider, too,] the 
uncertainty of victory, the pain of defeat and the pointlessness of regret.'
The emperor accepted the argument and checked his zeal for war. But an 
eastern bishop aroused the emperor again. He claimed to have received a 
dream from God commanding him to visit the emperor and to petition 
him to release the Christians in Libya from the usurpers. 'I shall assist him 
and make him master of Libya.' At this stage the emperor was unable to 
restrain his intentions any longer, but equipped the army and the ships and 
got arms and corn ready. He ordered Belisarius to be prepared to lead a 
campaign into Libya. At
189 that moment Pudentius revolted and captured Tripolis. He sent a request to 
Justinian for an army to occupy it. Likewise Goddas the Goth rebelled 
against his own master Gelimer, captured Sardinia, and wrote to Justinian 
to send an army under a general to take the island. Justinian sent out 
Cyril with 400 men to support him. Gelimer sent out a large fleet 
commanded by his brother with a picked force of the Vandal army, 
recaptured the island, and killed Goddas.
Belisarius took control of the army, fleet, and the officers, namely the 
general Solomon, Dorotheos of Armenia, Cyprian, Valerian, Martin, 
Alphias, John, Marcellus, and Cyril (the one just mentioned) and many 
others from Thrace. They were followed by 1,000 Elours, commanded by 
Pharas, and mounted archers of the Massagetai, who were led by 
Sisinnios and Balas. There were 500ships, each having a capacity of 501000 
medimni There were30,000 sailors, Egyptians, Ionians, and Cilicians. The 
fleet had a single admiral, Kalonymos of Alexandria. There were also 90 
dromones for sea battles. The emperor appointed Belisarius as general 
with sole authority over all. Belisarius came from Germania, which lies 
between Thrace and Illyria. His wife Antonina travelled with him. 
  Gelimer sent out his brother Tzatzon with 120 ships and a chosen army to 
the island of Sardinia against Goddas.
It was Justinian's seventh year when Belisarius was sent to the
288
island. The author Prokopios accompanied him. After setting out from the 
imperial city, they arrived at Abydos. Belisarius took care that the whole 
expedition should sail together and anchor in the same place. After arriving 
in Sicily he dispatched Prokopios, the author, to Syracuse, with a view to 
finding some persons who would guide him to Libya so as to     190 moor 
unexpectedly close to the land and disembark his force which was afraid of 
a sea battle. Belisarius himself set out with the fleet and made his base at 
Kaukana, two hundred stades from Syracuse. Prokopios entered Syracuse and 
bought supplies from Amalasuntha, Theuderich's wife and mother of 
Atalarich, emperor of Italy. They had [a pact of] friendship with Justinian. 
He unexpectedly met a childhood friend, who had experience of both Libya 
and the sea (in fact it was only the third day since his return from Carthage) and 
who affirmed that the Vandals were so blissfully ignorant and so untroubled 
by the thought of anyone attacking them that Gelimer had camped four 
days' journey from the sea. Prokopios took him and brought him to 
Belisarius at Kaukana. On being informed of these things, Belisarius on the 
third day anchored off the coast of Libya by a place called Shoal's Head. 
After disembarking and building a rampart and a deep ditch, they made 
camp there in a single day.
   At that spot the earth produced a great supply of water in the hole where 
the ditch was being dug, and so provided all the needs of the army and the 
animals in an otherwise waterless stretch of ground. On the following day 
the army went out to collect booty. The general rebuked them saying: 'It is 
wrong to use violence and to feed yourselves on another's property at any 
time and particularly when in danger. I allowed you to disembark in this 
land trusting in one thing alone, namely that by justice and good deeds we 
would serve God and win the Libyans to our side. But your lack of 
self-control will bring about the reverse for us, and will cause the Libyans to 
ally themselves with the Vandals. Take my advice. Obtain your food by 
buying it. Then you will not appear unjust, nor will you change the [present] 
Libyan friendship to enmity, and you 191       will set God at rest. Stop these 
assaults on what belongs to others, and shake off a profit filled with danger.' 
Belisarius then dispatched the army to the city of Syllektos and captured it 
without trouble. For having reached it at night, they entered along with the 
peasants, who were bringing in their wagons, and took the city. When day 
broke, they took the priest and the leading citizens of the place, and sent 
them to the general. On the same day, the administrator of the cursus 
publicus deserted and delivered the public horses. Also the courier who 
delivered the king's messages was captured.
289

  Belisarius put the army in order and marched towards Carthage. He put 
John the Armenian in charge of 300 picked troops with an order to 
follow the main army at all times and not to be far away. Having arrived 
at the city of Syllektos, he gained the inhabitants' friendship by 
goodness and kind words so that the remainder made the journey as if 
they were in their own country, with [the local population] neither 
retreating, nor hiding themselves, but providing a market and assisting 
the soldiers in other ways. Covering 80 stades each day, they reached 
Carthage. So by way of the city of Leptis and Adramouton they reached 
a place called Chrasis, 308 stades from Carthage, where the Vandals had 
a palace with beautiful parks, clear springs, and unlimited quantities of 
all kinds of fruit. So each of the soldiers pitched his tent in the orchards 
and they all enjoyed the ripe fruit, without any apparent reduction in its 
quantity.
  When Gelimer heard that the Romans were near by, he wrote to his 
brother Amatas in Carthage that he should kill Ilderich and all his other 
relatives who were in prison and should arm himself and the Vandals 
for war and anyone else in the city capable of fighting. Amatas carried 
out these instructions. Belisarius sent a message to Archelaos, the 
second in command, and Kalonymos the admiral
192		to approach Carthage but not to attack it until he gave the order. He 
himself went to Decimum which is 70 stades from Carthage.
  Gelimer ordered his nephew Kibamoundos to advance with 2,000 men 
on the left side, so that with Amatas coming from Carthage, Gelimer 
from the rear, and Kibamoundos from the country on the left, they 
would encircle the enemy in one place. Belisarius for his part ordered 
John, as I have already mentioned, to go ahead and the Massagetai to 
advance on the left of the army. Amatas, however, did not arrive at the 
required time, but left the main force of Vandals in Carthage and came 
as quickly as he could to Decimum with a small force, and these not 
even the best. He encountered John, came to blows, and was killed by 
John. Those with him turned in headlong flight and swept back all those 
going from Carthage to Decimum, thinking that their pursuers were 
very numerous. John and his band killed so many on their way up to 
the gates of Carthage that those who saw it would have conjectured that 
this was the work of 20,000.
  Kibamoundos with his 2,000 encountered the might of the Huns, and 
all were killed. Belisarius, who was at Decimum, learned nothing of 
this, but surrounded the place with a rampart and encamped there. He 
left his wife and the infantry there, and set out with the cavalry and 
the officers to Carthage. Finding the fallen
290

bodies of Amatas and the Vandals, and so learning what had happened, 
he went up on a hill and saw dust rising from the south and a great mass 
of Vandal cavalry led by Gelimer, who was unaware of the fate of either 
Kibamoundos or Amatas. When they came near each other, the vanguard 
of the Vandals captured the hill and were terrible to the enemy. The 
Romans were routed and fled to a place seven stades from Decimum, but 
God unexpectedly wrought        193 a change in the Vandals and made 
them cowards. For if they had made the pursuit immediately, they would 
have completely wiped out all of Belisarius' men (so great was the force 
of the Vandals) and would have caught John without effort on his way 
back from Carthage while stripping the corpses. But Gelimer, after 
coming down from the hill, and finding his brother's corpse, turned to 
lamentation and blunted the edge of his victory. Belisarius ordered his 
fugitives to hold their ground, got them all into proper order, rebuked 
them for their cowardice, and learning simultaneously of the death of his 
opponents and of John's victory, bravely advanced at the double against 
Gelimer. The barbarians, being caught unprepared, turned in headlong flight 
and suffered many losses as they made for Numidia and deserted Carthage. 
After night had fallen, Belisarius, John, and the Massagetai reached 
Decimum, learned all that had happened, and rejoiced.
  On the following day, they all proceeded to Carthage including the 
infantry and Belisarius' wife. The Carthaginians opened the gates, lit their 
lamps, and came in a throng to meet Belisarius. But the Vandals who 
were there sought refuge in the churches. When the fleet arrived, the 
citizens removed the chain and received the fleet into the harbour. The 
greater part of the fleet, however, heeding Belisarius' order, did not enter 
the harbour but anchored outside. But Kalonymos, acting in disobedience, 
did enter, plundered the vessels there, and seized much money. He also 
entered shops and houses near the harbour and took numerous prisoners.
  Belisarius, after gaining control of Carthage without toil, exhorted his 
soldiers with the following speech: 'You see how much good fortune came 
to us when we showed moderation towards the Libyans. Make sure you 
maintain that good behaviour in Carthage. Let no one wrong any man, or 
steal anything from him. Seeing that they have suffered many evils at the 
hands of the barbarian Vandals, our emperor has sent us to help them and 
to bestow freedom on
them.' Having exhorted them thus, he entered Carthage. And having 194        
gone up to the palace, he sat down on Gelimer's throne. Thereupon the 
Carthaginian merchants and those who lived by the sea came up to him, 
complaining of the robbery they had suffered at the hands of
291



the fleet. Belisarius made Kalonymos the admiral swear that he would 
bring out all that had been stolen, and give it back to the rightful owners. 
But Kalonymos appropriated a part to himself and, having sworn falsely, 
paid the penalty not much later. For he went out of his mind, bit off his 
tongue, and died.
  Belisarius entertained the people royally at a banquet at which 
Gelimer's servants served and poured the wine and waited upon them in 
every other way. So marked was the absence of violence when the 
general took the city that he inflicted no insults on anyone, and no one 
in the market locked up his house. Instead, the soldiers shopped, ate, 
and enjoyed themselves. Belisarius gave assurances to the Vandal 
fugitives in the churches and brought them out. He then turned his 
attention to the city walls which earlier had been neglected. It was 
reported that long ago it had been said in Carthage that gamma would 
drive out beta (and in return beta would drive out gamma). This was 
now accomplished. For earlier Gizerich had driven out Boniface, and 
now Belisarius drove out Gelimer.
  Gelimer gave out much money to the Libyan peasants and won them 
over to his side. He ordered them to kill any Romans who remained 
in the country. When the peasants did this, Belisarius learnt of it and 
sent out Diogenes, one of his bodyguard, to punish the peasants. 
Diogenes and his men went to a house and slept there without taking 
any precautions against attack. Gelimer heard of this, selected 300 troops, 
and sent them against him. They arrived, surrounded the house, but 
were afraid to go in during the night. The Romans perceived this, got 
up, armed themselves, mounted their horses, and, all twenty of them, 
suddenly burst open the doors. Defending themselves with their shields 
and using their spears they 195   routed their opponents. Gelimer, who 
was in Numidia, brought all the Vandals together plus any supporters he 
had among the Moors, and made ready for war. He sent a letter to his 
brother Tzatzon in Sardinia, announcing what had happened to him. 
Tzatzon set out from Sardinia immediately with the entire force, reached 
the coast of Libya on the third day and got to Gelimer. The two 
embraced one another round the neck and, without speaking, clutched 
each other's hands and wept. The army lamented the disaster in similar 
fashion. Gelimer, taking everyone along, set out for Carthage and tried to 
besiege it, thinking that those inside would betray the city to him, as 
would also any of the Roman soldiers who followed the doctrines of 
Arius. He sent messages to the leaders of the Huns and promised to give 
them many fine things, if they would betray the Romans to him. 
Belisarius learned about this from deserters, and having found a certain 
traitor

292

called Laurentius in Carthage, he had him impaled on a hill in front of the 
city, and as a result, those contemplating treachery grew very scared, so that 
the Massagetai confessed what they had been told by Gelimer. When 
Belisarius had won them all back to his side by persuasion and oaths, he 
immediately ordered John the Armenian to take all the cavalry except 500 
and set out to skirmish with the Vandals. On the following day Belisarius 
followed with the infantry and the 500 cavalry. He came upon the Vandals 
encamped at Trikamaron and they stayed near each other throughout the 
night. A prodigy happened in the Roman army, for the tips of their spears 
shone with a great fire. They looked at this and were amazed. At daybreak both 
sides armed and rushed into battle. John selected a few of his men, crossed the 
river and attacked the Vandals. Tzatzon pushed him back and gave chase with 
his Vandals as far as the river 196     but John, taking most of Belisarius' 
bodyguard, flung himself against Tzatzon with a shout and a loud noise. 
Then a fierce battle took place. Tzatzon, Gelimer's brother, fell. Next the 
whole Roman army crossed the river and advanced towards the enemy, 
whom they routed and pursued as far as their camp. On their return they 
stripped the bodies, especially of those who were wearing gold, and went 
back to their own camp. The casualties of this battle were 50 Roman dead 
as against 800 Vandals. Belisarius arrived late in the evening with the 
infantry and then, setting out as quickly as he could with the entire army, 
made for the Vandals' camp. When Gelimer realized that Belisarius was 
there with the infantry and the entire army, he mounted his horse and, 
without making any disposition, fled terrified to Numidia with a few of his 
relatives and servants. When the Vandals realized that he had fled and the 
enemy were already in sight, then the men, women, and children began to 
yell and wail. They took no care of their moneys or their grieving loved 
ones but each fled as best he could. The Romans arrived, took the camp 
and spent the whole night in pursuit. The men whom they came upon they 
killed, and took prisoner the women and children and found a greater mass 
of money than had ever before been gathered in one place. For after 
plundering the Roman Empire, the Vandals had transferred much money to 
Libya; and as the land itself was good and fertile there had been 
considerable revenue for them. The Vandals had ruled Libya for 95 years, 
and gathered great wealth, but on that day all this wealth returned to the 
hands of the Romans, for in the three months that Belisarius 197     had 
fought (from October to the end of December), he had subjugated all 
Libya.
  He dispatched John the Armenian with 200 picked men to pursue Gelimer 
till he caught him, dead or alive. He overtook Gelimer    		
	293



and would have captured him, if the following event had not occurred. 
Accompanying John was a certain Ouliaris, one of Belisarius' bodyguard. 
This man, being drunk on wine, saw a bird sit­ ting on a tree, drew his bow 
and shot at it. He missed the bird, but struck John in the back of the neck. 
He was mortally wounded and so died, a loss sadly mourned by the emperor 
Justinian, by Belisarius, and by all Romans and Carthaginians. Thus 
Gelimer got away on that day and made for the territory of the Moors. 
Belisarius pursued him and blockaded him on Mount Pappua in the furthest 
parts of Numidia. He invested the mountain throughout the winter, 
[Gelimer] lacking all supplies  for the Moors bake no bread, nor do they 
have wine, or oil but, like senseless animals, they eat uncooked barley and 
grain. Having fallen into these circumstances, Gelimer wrote to Pharas, 
whom Belisarius had left to guard him, asking that a lyre, a loaf of bread, 
and a sponge be sent to him. Pharas was confused about what this could 
mean, until the messenger explained that Gelimer desired to gaze at the 
bread, not having seen bread since his ascent; that he wanted a sponge 
because his eyes were suffering from being unbathed so that he might 
soothe them with a sponge; the lyre because he was a good lyre player, so 
that he might mourn and weep over his present misfortune to the 
accompaniment of a lyre. Pharas, having heard this, was greatly pained 
and grieved about man's lot, acted according to the message and sent all that 
Gelimer sought. When winter had passed, Gelimer, 198 fearing the Roman 
siege and pitying his relatives' children, who had bred worms in their 
distress, was weakened in his intent and wrote to Pharas, that after 
receiving pledges, he and his companions would surrender to Belisarius. 
Pharas gave him sworn assurances, then, taking all of them, came to 
Carthage. Belisarius received him with great joy, but Gelimer laughed as he 
approached Belisarius. Some suspected that, because of the extent of his 
suffering, he had departed from normal behaviour and had lost his wits. 
But his friends' view was that the man's wits were still sharp enough and 
that he had taken stock of the fact that he, an emperor descended from 
emperors, who had possessed great power and wealth, had suddenly had to 
flee and had suffered such hardship on Mount Pappua, and now had come 
as a captive, and that, as a result, he felt that man's lot warranted nothing 
else than much laughter. Belisarius treated his captive and all the other 
Vandal leaders with honour, so that he could bring them to the emperor 
Justinian in Byzantium. Straight away Belisarius sent Cyril with Tzatzon's 
head to Sardinia (formerly called Kyrnos), which he made subject to the 
Romans.
   He dispatched another John to Caesarea in Mauritania, which is
294

30 days' journey from Carthage and lies on the way to Cadiz and the 
setting of the sun, and another John, one of his bodyguard, he sent to the 
strait near Cadiz, by one of the pillars of Heracles, to take possession of 
the fort there which they call Septon. And to the islands which are near 
the strait where the Ocean flows in, Majorica and Minorica, he sent 
Apolinarios, a man excellent in wars. He sent some Libyans to Sicily and 
ordered them to capture the Vandal fort. The Goths who were guarding it 
reported this to Atalarich's mother. She wrote to Belisarius not to take 
the fort 199     arbitrarily until the emperor Justinian had been informed 
and made his decision. On this the Vandalic war ended.
  But envy, which is wont to arise in great good fortune, stung even 
Belisarius. Some slandered him to the emperor of plotting to usurp power. 
The emperor sent out Solomon to test Belisarius' views, with the choice that 
either he return to Byzantium with Gelimer and the Vandals, or else stay 
where he was but send them here. Belisarius was not unaware that some 
officers were accusing him of usurpation.  So he went to Byzantium and left 
Solomon as general of Libya. On reaching Byzantium with Gelimer and the 
Vandals, Belisarius was considered worthy of great honours such as in older 
times Roman generals had been awarded for their greatest victories. No one 
had achieved this great distinction for 600 years apart from Titus, Trajan, and 
other emperors who had fought and conquered the barbarian races. He 
displayed the spoils and captives from the war in the midst of the city and 
led a procession, which the Romans call a triumph, not, however, in the 
ancient manner, but going on foot from his own house to the Hippodrome. 
There were the spoils, such as are customarily set aside as suitable for the rank 
of the emperor: golden thrones, and carriages in which the wives of emperors 
ride, a mass of jewelry made of precious stones, golden cups, and all the other 
things which are used for the royal table. There was silver weighing many 
thousands of talents and all kinds of royal treasure, which Gizerich had taken 
when he plundered the palace in Rome. Among these were the Jewish 
treasures, which Titus, son of Vespasian, had brought to Rome after the 
capture of Jerusalem. There were prisoners in the triumph, among them 
Gelimer himself wearing some purple garment on his shoulder, and all his 
relatives, and those Vandals who were very tall and had a       200 fine 
physique. When Gelimer reached the Hippodrome and saw the emperor 
sitting on his seat and the people standing on either side, he could not stop 
saying and shouting out, 'Vanity of vanities, all is vanity'. When he had 
come before the emperor's seat, they stripped off his purple garment and 
compelled him to fall prone on the ground and do obeisance to the 
emperor.
295

  The emperor and the Augusta presented the children and grand­ 
children of Ilderich and all the relatives of the emperor Valentinian with 
large sums of money, and granted extensive and pleasant estates in 
Galatia to Gelimer where he could live with all his family. But they did 
not promote him to the rank of patrician since he refused to change from 
the faith of Arius.
  After the triumph Belisarius distributed consular largess and the
people of Byzantium enjoyed a great deal of the money from his 
victory, more than ever before.
  While Solomon governed Libya the Moors went to war against the 
Libyans. The Moors are descended from those races that Joshua the 
son of Nun had driven out of Phoenicia, where they had dwelt, 
between Sidon and Egypt. On reaching Egypt, but not being welcomed 
there, they made for Libya, and settled on its borders. Later the Roman 
emperors conquered the area and called it Tigisis. They set up two 
columns of white stone by the great spring, inscribed in the Phoenician 
script with the following: 'We are those who fled from before the face 
of Joshua, the robber, the son of Nun.' There were other races in Libya 
earlier, native ones who had an emperor
201	called Asklepios,  the one who wrestled with Herakles at Klipea
and who they claimed was the son of Earth. It was they who founded 
Carthage.
  Solomon took the army from Carthage and marched against the 
Moors. He went to Byzakion to a place called Ramma, where the Moors 
had camped by making a circle of camels and placing their women and 
children inside the circle. When the Moors came out against him, 
Solomon dismounted, and leading 500 selected soldiers, ordered them to 
attack one section of the circle and kill the camels. After killing about 
200, he rushed into the centre of the circle, where the women were 
seated. The terrified barbarians fled to the mountain in utter disorder. 
10,000 Moors were killed on that day. All the women and children were 
taken as slaves. Taking them together with the camels and all the booty, 
they returned to Carthage, and celebrated a feast of victory. But the 
barbarians gathered together again in full force, including women and 
children ( they left no one behind), marched against the Romans and 
began plundering the villages of Byzakion. Solomon quickly set out and 
led the whole army against them. He reached Burgarion, where the 
enemy had camped, and drew up the army for battle. The Moors stayed 
for the most part in the mountain of the Burgari, having no desire to 
descend into the plain. Solomon sent out Theodore at night with 1,000 
infantry and some of the standards, with the aim of climbing the 
mountain from behind the Moors during the night, and
296

as soon as the sun rose, they were to raise the standards high and move 
against the enemy. Likewise Solomon himself made the ascent at the 
crack of dawn and moved against the enemy. The barbarians, seeing that 
they were in the middle of the Romans, began to flee, and hurling 
themselves from cliffs destroyed themselves. In the battle 50,000 Moors 
perished but not a single        202        Roman died or suffered a wound, but all 
gained a victory unscathed. Most of their rulers joined the Romans. So 
great was the number of women and children taken by the Romans that 
they would sell a Moorish boy for the price of a sheep to anyone who 
wanted to buy one. It was then that the ancient saying of a female seer 
was fulfilled for the Moors, that most of them would perish at the hands 
of a beardless man. For Solomon had been a eunuch since childhood, not 
deliberately, but having lost his genitals through illness. He took all the 
booty and returned to Carthage.
  At this time, a portent occurred in the sky. For a whole year the sun 
shone darkly, without rays, like the moon. Mostly it looked as if it was 
eclipsed, not shining clearly as was normal.75 It was the tenth year of 
Justinian's rule.76 In this time neither war nor death stopped weighing 
upon men.
  At the beginning of spring Belisarius was sent by Justinian to Sicily to 
make it tributary to the Romans. After he had wintered in Sicily, when 
the festival of Easter had arrived,7 the Romans in Libya mutinied against 
Solomon in the following manner. Having taken the wives of the slain 
Vandals, they laid claim to the lands as their own and refused to pay 
taxes to the emperor for them. Solomon exhorted them not to rebel 
against the emperor, but to hand over the appointed sums to him. Some 
of them, especially among the Goths, succumbed to the Arian faith, and 
were excluded from church by the priests, who even refused to baptize 
their children. As a result a rebellion occurred during the [Easter] festival. 
The soldiers plotted to kill Solomon in the church. After leaving the city, 
they plundered its lands and treated the Libyans as enemies. Solomon 
heard this and amid considerable uproar attempted to persuade   203        
the soldiers to see reason and to end their rebellion. But they gathered and 
began insulting Solomon and the officers shamelessly. They went to the 
palace and elected Theodore the Cappadocian as their general, then 
taking up arms they set about killing anyone they encountered who was 
known to be friendly to Solomon, whether Roman or Libyan, stole 
money, broke into houses, and looted all the valuables. Solomon escaped 
by fleeing to the palace church. When night fell, he left the palace with the 
author Prokopios and Martin, embarked in a ship and went to Belisarius at 
Syracuse in Sicily, after
297

leaving instructions for Theodore to take care of Carthage and the 
imperial possessions. The soldiers gathered in the plain of Boule,82 
chose as their tyrant Martin's bodyguard Stotzas, a passionate and 
energetic man, with the purpose of driving out the emperor's officers 
and taking control of Libya.
  When Stotzas came close to Carthage, he sent a command to 
Theodore to hand over the city to him immediately so as to avoid 
harm. But Theodore and the Carthaginians agreed to defend Carthage 
for the emperor. Stotzas thereupon set about besieging the city. Belisarius 
selected a hundred men from his bodyguard and shield-bearers, whom 
Solomon put on board a single ship and sailed into Carthage as darkness 
fell. When day broke, the usurper and the soldiers turned and fled in 
disgraceful confusion at the news of Belisarius' arrival. Belisarius 
collected about 2,000 of the army, pursued the fugitives and caught up 
with them at the city of Membresa. Seeing that they had left their 
ranks and were going around in complete disorder, Belisarius moved 
down on all of them. 104    They turned and fled and, when they reached 
Numidia, regathered. Few died in this battle, and most of them were 
Vandals. Belisarius spared the Romans, but plundered their camp, 
found a great quantity of money and the women on whose account the 
war had taken place. With this accomplished, Belisarius returned to 
Carthage. Then a report came from Sicily that a rebellion had broken 
out in the camp and was about to throw everything into confusion 
unless he returned there quickly. So after arranging matters in Libya as 
best he could and entrusting Carthage to Ildiger and Theodore, he went 
to Sicily.
  At this news Justinian sent to Libya his nephew Germanus, a patrician, with 
Domnicus and Symmachos, learned men, and a small force. On reaching 
Carthage, Germanus made a count of the soldiers there, and after examining 
the books of the scribes, in which the soldiers' names were registered, he 
discovered that a third of the army in Carthage and the other cities was loyal 
to the emperor, but all the rest were arrayed with the usurper. Because of this 
he did not march out to battle, but took care of his army. He kept on 
announcing that he had been sent by the emperor to defend the soldiers who 
had been wronged, and to punish those who had been responsible for the 
wrong done to them. The soldiers who heard these statements gradually came 
over to him. Germanus received them with great friendliness, gave them 
assurances, treated them with respect, and paid them their wages. When word 
of this was spread about and reached everyone, they deserted the usurper and 
came to Carthage. Stotzas, already aware of the harm, encouraged those who 
remained,
   and marched against Carthage. Germanus armed his forces and moved 
against him. Their obvious eagerness to show their loyalty to the emperor 
persuaded the general. When the forces under Stotzas saw them, they were 
overcome with cowardice and retreated to Numidia. Germanus came there 
with the whole army not much later. When he caught up with them, he 
discovered that thousands upon thousands of barbarian Moors had joined 
them people ruled by Iaudas and Ortaias. They clashed and a violent battle 
ensued   205 during which one of the enemy killed Germanus' horse. 
Germanus fell to the ground and would have been in great danger had not his 
bodyguards quickly surrounded him, brought him a horse, and helped him 
remount. So the soldiers were routed and Stotzas in this confusion was able to 
get away with a few men. Germanus immediately exhorted those around him 
to rush at the enemy's camp, which he gained by fighting. There the soldiers 
began seizing the money without reason and took no notice of the general. 
Germanus, in fear that the enemy would take joint counsel and attack him, 
stood mournfully, urging them to return to good order. But the Moors, 
having seen the rout, rushed out against the mutineers and pursued them 
jointly with the imperial army. Stotzas, who had placed his confidence in 
them and now saw what was being done by them, fled with a hundred men and 
reached inner Mauritania. So the revolt ended.
  The emperor, after recalling Germanus along with Domnicus and 
Symmachos to Byzantium, again put Solomon in charge of Libya's affairs 
(it was the thirteenth year of Justinian's rule), and assigned to him, among 
other officers, Rufinus, Leontios, and John, son of Sisinnios. Solomon, after 
sailing to Carthage, ruled the people fairly and made Libya secure, keeping 
the army in good order. Anyone under suspicion was sent to Byzantium.
  Belisarius, after regaining Sicily and Rome, which had been held by 
Vittius, and the neighbouring cities, brought Vittius to Justinian in 
Byzantium along with the man's wife and children. The emperor dispatched 
Narses the chamberlain with a fleet to Rome to maintain control of those 
parts.
  Solomon, once the administration of Carthage and Libya was running 
smoothly, began a campaign against the Moors. First he sent out a force 
under Gontharis his bodyguard, an able warrior. He 206   reached the river 
Bigas and set up camp at Baugain, a deserted city. There he was defeated in 
battle, and after returning to his stockade, was being hard pressed by the 
Moors' siege. Solomon, who was close by, learned of this and came 
quickly. The barbarians retreated in fear and camped at the foot of Mount 
Aurasion. Solomon clashed with them and routed them. The Moors fled 
into the more difficult


parts of the mountain and got away to Mauritania. Solomon plundered 
the plains of Mougade, fired all their land, carried off a great deal of 
corn, and returned to the fort at Zerboule. There Iaudas had fled with 
20,000 Moors. Iaudas, after leaving the fort, ascended to the heights of 
Mount Aurasion and kept his peace. Solomon captured the fort of 
Zerboule after three days' siege, plundered all its contents, established a 
garrison there, and marched on. He began looking for a spot from where 
it would be possible to reach the summit of the mountain, which was 
precipitous and posed great difficulty. But God provided a way out of this 
impasse, as follows. One of the soldiers among the infantry, who was an 
optio, named Genzon, either in anger or moved by some divine impulse, 
began climbing towards the enemy on his own. Some of his fellow 
soldiers, greatly amazed at what was happening, began following behind 
him. Three of the Moors who had been appointed to guard the entrance 
saw the man and raced to meet him, thinking that he was climbing to 
attack them. But he met them separately because of the narrowness of 
the path, so he dispatched the first one and then the second and the third 
in the same way. Seeing this, those behind moved      207   
against the enemy with a great deal of noise and uproar. The Roman 
army heard and saw what was happening, and not waiting for the general 
or the trumpets, nor keeping any order, but making a great hubbub and 
encouraging one another, raced towards the enemy camp. Thereupon 
Rufinus and Leontios performed deeds of outstanding valour against the 
enemy. The barbarians immediately fled as best each could. Iaudas, 
wounded in the thigh by a javelin, got away and retreated to Mauritania. 
The Romans, after plundering the enemy camp, no longer left Mount 
Aurasion, but built forts and are continuing to guard it. There was one 
extremely precipitous rock, on which the Moors had built a tower and 
made this a secure place of refuge, strong and unassailable. There Iaudas 
happened to have placed his money and his women, appointing an old 
man as guard of the money. For he could not have suspected that the 
enemy would come to this tower or be able to take it by force. But the 
Romans, while exploring the harsh territory of Aurasion, came there. 
One of them attempted to climb the tower for fun. The women began 
mocking him and so, too, did the old man. But when the Roman, using 
his hands and feet to climb, came quite close, he drew his sword, drove 
it hard, got the old man in the neck, and cut off his head. The soldiers, 
by now confident, climbed the tower holding on to each other. They took 
the women and the great quantities of money that were there and brought 
them to Solomon. Solomon built walls round the Libyan cities, and since 
the Moors had retreated
300

from Numidia in defeat, he made the land of Zabe and Mauritania and its 
metropolis Itiphis a tributary province of the Romans. For Caesarea is the 
first metropolis of the other Mauritania, which Belisarius had earlier made 
subject. So all the Libyans became subjects of Rome and enjoyed secure 
peace.
  After four years of this peace, in Justinian's 17th year, Kyros and Sergius, 
the sons of Bakchos, the brother of Solomon, were        208    dispatched 
by the emperor to rule in Libya, Kyros as governor of Pentapolis, Sergius of 
Tripolis. The Moors sent their elders to Sergius at the city of Leptis Magna to 
offer him gifts and confirm the peace. But Sergius, on the advice of Pudentius, 
a citizen of Tripolis, received eighty of the more trustworthy barbarians in the 
city, promising to fulfill all they sought, and he confirmed the peace by oaths. 
The others he expelled to a suburb. The former he invited to a meal and killed 
all of them, except one who slipped away unnoticed and reported these events 
to his tribesmen. At this they raced to their own camp and joined with all the 
others to attack the Romans. Sergius and Pudentius met them and when battle 
was joined, Pudentius was killed after losing many men while Sergius, 
stricken with fright beyond description, sailed to Carthage  to his uncle 
Solomon.
  The Moors deserted all Tripolis. After plundering all the country there and 
enslaving a mass of Romans, the barbarians went to Pentapolis. On hearing 
of this, Kyros fled to Carthage by sea. The barbarians, there was no one to 
oppose them, took the city of Veronica, marched on Carthage land, on reaching 
Byzakion plundered many villages during their invasion of those parts. Antalas, 
an enemy of Solomon, who had killed his brother, joined the barbarians and led 
them against Carthage and Solomon. Solomon heard of this, collected the army, 
and moved against them. He camped at the city of Beste, six days' journey 
from Carthage. Kyros, Sergius, and young Solomon, the children of Bakchos 
were with him. Seeing the number of barbarians, he took fright and sent a 
message to their leaders castigating them for taking up arms against the 
Romans, to whom they were bound by treaty, and requesting that the peace be 
secured and confirmed by oaths. The barbarians, mocking his words, replied, 
'Sergius took an oath      209      on the Gospels and kept it splendidly by 
killing eighty men. How should we now trust your oaths? ' Battle was joined 
and the Romans were routed. Solomon's horse stumbled and he was killed as 
were his bodyguards. 
  Sergius, his nephew, was entrusted with the rule of Libya by the emperor. 
John, son of Sisinniolos, and the other officers developed a great hatred for 
Sergius, so that none wanted to take up arms against
301
the enemy, and the barbarians plundered all without fear. Antalas wrote to 
the emperor Justinian saying, 'All the Moors choose to be your friends and 
servants, but, unable to endure the persecution of Solomon and his nephews, 
have rebelled. Recall these men and peace will be established between 
Romans and Moors.' The emperor refused to do this. Antalas and the army of 
the Moors gathered again in Byzakion. With them was Stotzas commanding a 
few soldiers and Vandals. The Libyans exhorted John, son of Sisinniolos, to 
raise an army and march against the enemy with Himerios, the officer 
commanding the detachment in Byzakion. He took the army and marched 
against the enemy, ordering Himerios to go ahead. In the clash the Romans 
were defeated. The barbarians captured Himerios alive with his army, 
imprisoned him, and handed over the soldiers to Stotzas after they agreed to 
campaign against the Romans. They then took the city of Adramyton by craft 
because of Himerios.
  Some of the Libyans fled to Sicily, some to other islands and to 
Byzantium, while the Moors and Stotzas plundered all Libya with complete 
freedom. The Libyans who had come to Byzantium begged the emperor to 
send an army and his best general to Libya. The
210		emperor sent Areobindos with a few soldiers. He was well born and prudent, but 
quite unskilled in military matters. With him went Athanasios and a few Armenians, 
led by the Arsacids  Artabanes and John. The emperor did not even recall Sergius, but 
ordered him to join with Areobindos as generals of Libya. Sergius was to wage war 
against the barbarians in Numidia, while Areobindos was to fight the Moors in 
Byzakion. Areobindos reached Libya and, taking half the army, sent out John, son of 
Konstantiolos, against Stotzas and the barbarians. When John had seen the vast 
numbers of the enemy, he was compelled to come to grips with them. He and 
Stotzas hated each other so much that each prayed he would slay the other and so die. 
In the battle both left their camps and went for each other. John drew his bow and hit 
Stotzas on the right side of the groin. Stotzas died a few days later. But the barbarians 
advanced on the enemy with great fury and, having unlimited numbers, killed 
John and all the Romans. John is reported to have said, 'I die a happy death with my 
prayer against Stotzas answered.' When Stotzas, learned of John's death he, too, 
died joyfully. John the Armenian was also killed. This news grieved the emperor 
considerably. He dismissed Sergius from office and recalled him, entrusting the 
rule of Libya to Areobindos alone.
  Two months later a certain Gontharis, leader of the detachments in 
Numidia, devised a stratagem against Areobindos and
302

secretly sent a message to the Moors that they should march on 
Carthage. So straight away the enemies' army from both Numidia and 
Byzakion gathered in one place and eagerly moved towards Carthage. 
Koutzinas and Iaudas led the Numidians, Antalas those
from Byzakion. The usurper John (in the place of Stotzas) joined them 211   
with his soldiers. On being informed of this, Areobindos, trusting in 
Gontliaris' loyalty, delivered the army to him and sent him out together 
with Artabanes and the Armenians against the enemy. Gontharis sent his 
own cook, a Moor, to the barbarians to tell Antalas that Gontharis wanted 
to share the rule of Libya with him. Antalas heard the message with 
pleasure but replied that such matters could not be managed safely through 
a cook. So Gontharis sent to Antalas his trusted bodyguard Oulitheos with 
the request that Antalas should come close to Carthage, so that he himself 
could kill Areobindos. Oulitheos met Antalas secretly and they agreed 
that Antalas should rule Byzakion and take half of Areobindos' money 
plus 1,500 Roman soldiers, while Gontharis should take the title of 
emperor and control Carthage. After accomplishing this, Oulitheos 
returned to Gontharis. The barbarians, for their part, marched with great 
zeal towards Carthage. They arrived at Decimum, camped there and next 
day moved against Carthage. But some men of the Roman army met 
them unexpectedly, attacked them, and killed many of the Moors. 
Gontharis rebuked them for their boldness claiming that they were 
endangering the Roman state. But Areobindos sent a message to 
Koutzinas calling on him to betray the Moors and he agreed to do this. 
For the race of the Moors is faithless both to one another and to 
everybody else. Areobindos revealed this to Gontharis who told 
Areobindos not to trust Koutzinas, and meanwhile sent Oulitheos to 212   
tell Antalas. Gontharis was plotting to kill Areobindos secretly and 
persuaded him to leave Carthage and take part in the battle. But 
Areobindos, being inexperienced in war, delayed, because he was unable 
to put on his armour. As it was getting late, he postponed marshalling the 
troops till next day and went to rest. Gontharis suspected that Areobindos 
had purposely delayed because he knew what was happening, so he 
rebelled openly.
  Areobindos quickly left Carthage and fled, embarked on a ship and 
was about to sail to Byzantium, had not a storm sprung up in the 
meantime and prevented him. After dispatching Athanasios to Carthage, 
he summoned a number of men. Among these was
·Artabanes, who exhorted Areobindos at length neither to lose heart nor to 
be a coward and fear Gontharis, but to march against him with all his 
followers, before anything worse happened. Meanwhile Gontharis 
slandered Areobindos to the troops, claiming that he was

cowardly and timid and refused to give them their pay. Areobindos with 
Artabanes and his followers moved against Gontharis. The battle took place on 
the battlements and by the gates. Most of the soldiers did not know 
Gontharis' intentions and gathered to take up arms against him. But when 
Areobindos saw men being killed, unused as he was to such a sight, he 
could not overcome his cowardice and fled to the monastery near the sea, 
which Solomon had built and fortified as a secure fort. He sought refuge 
there with his wife and sister. Artabanes also then fled. So Gontharis, having 
won by force, took the palace. He summoned the city's bishop and 
Athanasios and ordered them to give assurances to Areobindos and bring him 
to the palace, threatening to besiege him if he did not obey and to withdraw his 
guarantees of safe conduct. Areobindos accepted the assurances from the 
bishop Reparatus, came to see
213 Gontharis, and prostrated himself as a suppliant, holding out the gospels on 
which the priest had given him the assurances. Gontharis made him stand 
up, swore in everyone's presence that he would not harm him, indeed would 
send him with his wife and his moneys to Byzantium on the following day. 
After dismissing the priest, he took Areobindos and Athanasios to dine with 
him in the palace. He honoured Areobindos and made him recline on the 
first couch there, and after dinner, ordered him to sleep in a bedroom. He 
then sent Oulitheos with some others who killed him as he shrieked and 
groaned. He spared Athanasios because of his age.
  On the following day Gontharis sent Areobindos' head to Antalas, but 
kept the money and, contrary to the agreement, gave him none of it. When 
Antalas learned what had happened to Areobindos, he considered Gontharis' 
false oaths and wanted to go over to the emperor Justinian. Artabanes, for 
his part, accepted Gontharis' assurances and went into the palace with the 
Armenians and agreed to serve the usurper, but secretly planned to destroy 
him. After he had disclosed his intention to his nephew Gregory and his 
bodyguard Artaserios, Gregory said to him, 'Now, Artabanes, it is possible 
for you alone to gain the glory of Belisarius. For he received an army and 
great sums of money from the emperor, with subordinate officers and a 
fleet larger than anyone had ever heard of, and with great toil made Libya a 
tributary state of the Romans. But now Libya has revolted from the Empire 
and is again in its old state. It lies with you alone to win it back for the 
emperor and to restore its affairs. Consider your race, that you are an 
Arsacid by descent, and that being well born, it is always necessary for you 
to act bravely and display many deeds of valour. Remember how as a young 
man you killed Akakios, commander of the Armenians and Tzitas, the
Roman general, and joined in campaigns with Chosroes the emperor	214
of Persia. Being such a man do not let Roman authority stay in the hands of that 
drunken dog. Artaserios and I will help as best we can in carrying out your 
commands.
  Gontharis ordered Artabanes to take charge of the army and march against 
Antalas and the Moors in Byzakion. He was accompanied by John, leader of 
the rebel troops, and the bodyguard Oulitheos. The Moors under Koutzinas 
followed. He clashed with Antalas and the barbarians and routed them. Playing 
the coward deliberately, Artabanes suddenly wheeled round his detachment and 
drove towards the camp. Oulitheos planned to kill him in the camp. Artabanes 
alleged that he was afraid that the barbarians might come out of the city of 
Adramyton to help their opponents and do irreparable damage to us. He also 
said that Gontharis ought to march out with the full army and so capture them 
all. He announced this to the usurper on his return to Carthage. After taking 
counsel with Pasiphilos, the usurper decided to arm the entire army and lead it 
himself on a campaign, leaving only a garrison in the city. Out of suspicion 
Gontharis killed many men every day. Gontharis went from Carthage to a 
suburban estate, where from ancient times there were three couches, on which 
he reclined with Artabanes, Athanasios, and Peter, Solomon's bodyguard. 
Artabanes, thinking this was a suitable time to kill the usurper, confided this to 
Gregory and Artaserios and three trusted bodyguards. He ordered the body­ 
guards to remain inside with their swords. For it was customary for 
bodyguards to stand behind their commanders at dinner. He ordered them to 
make the attempt suddenly when he himself gave the signal by a nod, and 
having ordered Artaserios to begin the action, he directed Gregory to select 
many of the most daring Armenians and have them present in the palace 
carrying their swords, without
revealing the plot to any of them.* After the drink had been flowing	215 
for some time and Gontharis was thoroughly soused with wine, Artaserios drew 
his sword and went for the usurper. One of the servants, seeing the naked 
blade, shouted out, 'What are you doing, man?' Gontharis turned his face and 
stared at him. Artaserios struck him with his sword and cut off his right hand. As 
Gontharis jumped up, Artabanes, dagger drawn, plunged it to the hilt into the 
usurpers side, killing him immediately. Then Artabanes ordered Athanasios to 
take control of the money in the palace, as he had done under Areobindos. 
When the guards learned of Gontharis' death, they proclaimed Justinian their 
'victorious emperor'. Thereupon those who were well disposed to the emperor 
leaped into the houses of the mutineers and killed them. John fled with the
305

Vandals to the church, but Artabanes, after giving them pledges, brought 
them out and sent them to Byzantium. The slaying of the usurper took 
place 36 days after his rebellion, during Justinian's 19th year. 
  Artabanes won great fame for this among all men. Periecta, 
Areobindos' wife, rewarded Artabanes with rich presents. The emperor 
made him general of all Libya. Not much later, however, Artabanes 
resigned and returned to the emperor in Byzantium, while the emperor 
appointed John, brother of Pappas, as general of Libya. After reaching 
Libya, John campaigned against Antalas and the Moors in Byzakion, 
vanquished them in battle, slew many enemies and, after regaining the 
standards which the barbarians had captured from Solomon, sent them to 
the emperor in Byzantium. He then chased the remaining barbarians out 
of Roman territory. Later, the Leuathai arrived in Byzakion with a large 
army from the country round Tripolis and united with Antalas. John met 
them, was defeated with heavy losses, and retreated to Carthage. The 
barbarians went as far as Carthage plundering its territory. Later John
216 aroused the enthusiasm of his soldiers, made an alliance with the Moors 
under Koutzinas and other Moors, engaged the barbarians in battle and 
routed them. In a mighty pursuit, he killed a great mass of them, while the 
remainder fled to the most distant parts of Libya. In this manner the affairs 
of Libya gained complete peace.
306

307-312
AM 6027 (AD 534/5)
[Year of the divine Incarnation] 527 Justinian, 
8th year
Chosroes, 10th year 
John, 3rd year Epiphanios, 
15th year
John, bishop of Jerusalem (11 years), 1st year Timothy, 
15th year
Ephraim, 8th year
In this year, the emperor of the Iberians, Zamanarzos, came to 
Constantinople to the most pious emperor Justinian. He was accompanied by 
his wife and senators, and sought to be an ally and true friend of the 
Romans. The emperor approved of this desire and honoured him and his 
senators with many gifts. Likewise the Augusta gratified his wife with 
jewelry of all kinds decorated with pearls. The emperor sent them back in 
peace to their own kingdom. 
313

AM 6028 (AD 535 /6)
[Year of the divine Incarnation] 528 Justinian, 9th 
year
Chosroes, 11th year
Agapetos, bishop of Rome (2 years), 1st year 
Epiphanios, r 6th year John, 
2nd year Timothy, r 6th year 
Ephraim, 9th year
   In this year Pompeiopolis in Mysia suffered from divine anger. The ground 
was split by the earthquake, and half the city along with its inhabitants was 
engulfed. They were beneath the earth and their voices could be heard 
shouting for mercy. The emperor gave generously towards excavating and 
assisting them and granted gifts to the survivors.
   In the same year Justinian directed that the hymn, 'The only­ begotten Son 
and Word of God' be sung in churches. He also made the clock at the Milion.


314



Year of the divine Incarnation 529
Justinian, emperor of the Romans ( 38 years), 10th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (48 years), 12th year 
Agapetos, bishop of Rome (2 years), 2nd year Anthimos, 
bishop of Constantinople (1 year), 1st year John, bishop 
of Jerusalem (11years), 3rd year
Timothy, bishop of Alexandria (17 years), 17th year Ephraim, 
bishop of Antioch (18 years), 10th year
   In this year, Epiphanios, bishop of Constantinople, died on 217    
5 June of the 15thindiction, having been bishop for 16 years and 3 
months.
Anthimos, a heretic, bishop of Trebizond, was transferred to 
Constantinople. Agapetos, bishop of Rome, arrived in Constantinople 
in this year and called a synod against the impious Severus and Julian 
of Halikarnassos and the other Theopaschites. Thereupon Anthimos, 
bishop of Constantinople, was deposed for being of one mind with 
them and driven out of the capital after ten months as bishop. Menas, 
presbyter and steward of the hospice of Sampson, was ordained in his 
stead by Agapetos, the Pope of Rome. Agapetos, bishop of Rome, died 
while he was in Byzantium.  Silverius, who lived for one year, was 
ordained in his place.




[AM 6030, AD 537/8]
Justinian, 1th year Chosroes, 
13th year
Silvester, bishop of Rome (1 year), 1st year 
Menas, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 1st year John, 4th year
Camas, bishop of Alexandria (1 year), 1st year Ephraim, 11th year
   In this year on 27 December of the 1st indiction, the first consecration of the 
Great Church took place. The procession set out from St Anastasia, with Menas the 
patriarch sitting in the imperial carriage and the emperor joining in the procession 
with the people. From the day when the most holy Great Church was burned until 
the day of its consecration there elapsed 5 years,11months, and 10 days.


[AM 6031, AD 538/9)
Justinian, 12th year Chosroes, 
14th year
Vigilius, bishop of Rome (18 years), 1st year
Menas, 2nd year John, 5th year
Theodosios, bishop of Alexandria (2 years), 1st year Ephraim, 12th 
year
   In this year the Bulgars, namely two kings with a great force of Bulgars and a 
troop of cavalry, invaded Scythia and Mysia. At the time Justin was magister 
militum in Mysia and Badouarios in Scythia. They marched out against the 
Bulgars and clashed with
316


them. Justin was killed in battle and Constantine,  son of Florentius,	218 
replaced him. The Bulgars advanced as far as the districts of Thrace.
Constantine, the magister militum, went against them, as did also 
Godilas, and Akoum the Hun, magister militum per Illyricum, for whom 
the emperor had stood as baptismal sponsor. Surrounding the Bulgars, 
they cut them down and killed a. great mass of them, stripped them of 
all the booty, and gained a complete victory, even killing their two kings. 
As they were returning joyfully, other Bulgars met them, and as the 
magistri militum were weary, they turned their backs in retreat. The 
Bulgars gave chase and lassoed Constantine, Akoum, and Godilas as they 
fled. Godilas cut the lasso with his dagger and slipped out, but 
Constantine and Akoum were captured alive. They gave back 
Constantine for a payment of 1,000 nomismata, and he came to 
Constantinople, but they held Akoum in their own country with the other 
captives.
  In the same year Chosroes, emperor of the Persians, captured Antioch 
the Great in Syria,5 and entered Apameia and other cities.






Year of the divine Incarnation 532
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (38 years), 13th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (48 years) 15th year Vigilius, 
bishop of Rome (18 years), 2nd year
Menas, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 3rd year John, 
bishop of Jerusalem (11 years) 6th year Theodosios, bishop 
of Alexandria (2 years), 2nd year Ephraim, bishop of 
Antioch (18 years) 13th year
In this year Moundos came over to the Romans, a descendant from
219 the race of the Gepids, the son of Giesmos. After his father's death, he 
went to Regas, his maternal uncle, who was king of Sermium. 
Theuderich, king of Rome heard this, sent him a message and 
persuaded him to join him and be his ally. After Theuderich's death, he 
went to the river Danube and asked the emperor Justinian to accept 
him as a subject of the Empire, and so he came to Constantinople. 
The emperor honoured him and his son with many gifts and released 
them, making Moundos magister militum per Illyricum. When he 
came to Illyricum, the Bulgars invaded in large numbers. He hastened 
against them and destroyed them all. From among the captives, he sent 
their leader and others to Constantinople, where they were paraded in 
the Hippodrome. A deep peace came to Thrace, for the Huns no longer 
dared to cross the Danube. The emperor sent the Bulgar prisoners to 
Armenia and Lazica and had them enrolled in the numeri.

318

 (AM 6033, AD 540/1)
Justinian, 14th year 
Chosroes, 16th year 
Vigilius, 3rd year 
Menas, 4th year John 
7th year
Paul, bishop of Alexandria (2 years), 1st year Ephraim, 
14th year
In the 14th year of Justinian, Chosroes, emperor of the Persians, made his 
fourth invasion into Roman territory. After arriving in the territory of 
Commagene, he planned to march against Palestine and Jerusalem, to 
plunder the treasures in Jerusalem. For he had heard that the land was 
good and that its inhabitants had much gold. The Romans did not intend 
opposing them in any way. They entered the fortresses, as each man was 
able, and planned to guard these and save themselves. When Justinian heard 
this, he sent Belisarius, who had returned from the West, against them. 
Travelling by public horse, he reached Euphratesia with all speed. Justus, 
the emperor's cousin, with Bouzes, the magister militum per Orientem, 
had
sought refuge in Hierapolis. When they heard that Belisarius was on	220
his way, they wrote to him to come to them and defend Hierapolis. 
Belisarius castigated them severely, writing to them that it was not right 
to defend a single city and allow the enemies to march through Roman 
territory with impunity, and to destroy the cities of the Empire: 'For you 
know well that it is better to die bravely than to be saved by not 
fighting. For that would not be called safety, but treachery and rightly 
so. But come with all speed to the district of Europos, where, having 
assembled the whole army, I hope to deal with the enemy to the extent 
that God wishes.' At this news the commanders took courage and left 
Justus with a few soldiers to guard Hierapolis while the rest went to 
Europos. When Chosroes learned that Belisarius had encamped the entire 
Roman army at Europos, he was amazed, and not knowing whether to 
advance further, sent his
319
secretary Abandanes, an intelligent man, to Belisarius to spy on the general 
and the camp on the pretext of complaining that the emperor Justinian had not 
sent ambassadors to Persia to discuss peace. Belisarius, when he learned that 
the envoys were coming, himself selected 6,ooo tall men with fine figures and 
went out far from the camp to hunt. He ordered Diogenes, the bodyguard, and 
Adoulios, an Armenian, to cross the river with 1,000 cavalry to examine the 
river­ crossing. When Belisarius became aware that the ambassador was 
nearby, he pitched his tent in a deserted spot, making it clear that he had come 
without any equipment. He then arranged his troops. On each side of the tent 
were Thracians and Illyrians, Goths and Elours and with them Vandals and 
Moors. They covered most of the plain.
221 Nor did they stay in one spot, but moved around stalking, as if they were hunters 
and noticed Chosroes' ambassador incidentally as it seemed. So they walked 
with their gear on, smiling cheerfully, brandishing their axes and hunting spears. 
Abandanes, when he was ushered into Belisarius' presence, alleged that Chosroes 
was aggrieved that Justinian had not sent ambassadors to him in accordance 
with the agreement to discuss peace and so had compelled Chosroes to 
campaign against the Romans. Belisarius took no account of his words, saying 
that Chosroes was responsible for the war. For if he had desired peace, he would 
not have come to Roman territory to lay claim to it, but would have stayed in his 
own country to await the ambassadors. With that he dismissed the envoy, who 
went to Chosroes and said that he had seen the general Belisarius, a man who was 
exceptionally intelligent and brave, and soldiers such as he had never beheld 
before. 'I was amazed by their good order, being assembled, as they are, from a 
variety of races.' He advised Chosroes not to get involved in a fight with them, in 
case he was defeated and lost the entire Persian empire, being in Roman 
territory and having no means of escape. Yet a victory would not be a great 
achievement, because he would merely have defeated a Roman general. On his 
advice Chosroes decided to return immediately to his own country. But he was 
afraid of crossing the river as the Romans held it. After much deliberation he 
sent a request to Belisarius to draw back the men who had crossed the river and 
to provide him passage without hindrance. Belisarius immediately sent envoys 
to him and praised him for withdrawing and assured him that ambassadors 
from the emperor would arrive shortly to discuss peace. Chosroes asked 
Belisarius that his passage through Roman territory should be free of danger. 
Belisarius sent John of Edessa, a most illustrious man, as a hostage to Chosroes 
to guarantee his safe passage out of Roman lands. The Romans praised 
Belisarius for having gained greater glory
320


from this achievement than when he had brought the two 
emperors Gelimer 222     and Vittigis as prisoners of war to 
Byzantium. For it was truly worthy of record and praise that, when the 
Romans were terrified and were all hiding in their fortresses and 
Chosroes was present with a large army in the middle of the Roman 
Empire, one man should come from Byzantium by the public post to set 
up camp against the emperor of the Persians, and Chosroes, 
unexpectedly deceived by that man's cleverness, should return to his 
own land without accomplishing anything. In the same year, on the 
death of Timothy, bishop of Alexandria, the impious Severus, the 
adulterous bishop of Antioch, and Julian of Halikarnassos, exiles in 
Alexandria, differed on the question of the Corruptible and the 
Incorruptible, and came into conflict with each other since they were 
strangers to the truth. The one installed Theodosios, and the other 
Gainas as bishops of Alexandria. Gainas held the bishopric for a single 
year, Theodosios for two. Justinian dispatched orders calling them to 
Byzantium, commanded them to stay apart from one another, and 
installed a certain Paul, who seemed to be orthodox, as bishop of 
Alexandria. But Paul commemorated the unholy Severus and was 
banished from the bishopric through the emperor's anger and came to 
dwell in Jerusalem.


321



Justinian, 15th year 
Chosroes, 17th year Vigilius, 
4th year Menas, 5th year 
John, 8th year
Paul, 2nd year Ephraim, 15th 
year
   In this year, in October of the 5th indiction the great plague broke out in 
Byzantium. In the same period the feast of the Presentation of the Lord was 
first celebrated in Byzantium on 2 February. On 16 August of the same 5th 
indiction, a great earthquake occurred in Constantinople, and churches, houses, 
and the city wall collapsed, especially the part near the Golden Gate. The spear 
held by the statue which stands in the Forum of the holy Constantine fell 
down, as well as the right arm of the statue of the Xerolophos. Many died and 
there was great fear.
322




Justinian, 16th year 
Chosroes, 18th year 
Vigilius, 5th year 
Menas, 6th year 
John, 9th year
Zoïlos, bishop of Alexandria (7 years), 1st year 
Ephraim, r 6th year
   In this year the emperor of the Auxoumite Indians of the Jews 223 
came to fight one another for the following reason. The emperor of the 
Auxoumites dwells further inland with regard to Egypt of the Jewish 
religion. Roman traders travel across Homerite [territory] to the 
Auxoumite and the inland areas of the Indians and Ethiopians. When 
some traders crossed into Homerite borders, as usual, Damianos, the 
emperor of the Homerites, killed them and took away all their goods, 
saying, 'The Romans wrong the Jews in their own country and kill 
them.' As a result the trade of the inland Indians of the Auxoumite 
region ceased. The emperor of the Auxoumites, Adad, announced his 
resentment to the Homerite, saying, 'You have harmed my empire and 
inland India by preventing Roman traders from reaching us.' Great 
enmity developed and war broke out between them. When they were 
about to begin the war, Adad, emperor of the Auxoumites made a vow 
saying, 'If I conquer the Homerite, I shall become a Christian, since I 
am fighting on behalf of Christians.' With the help of God, he gained 
the victory by force of arms and captured Damianos, their emperor, 
alive and also took their land and their palace. Adad, emperor of the 
Auxoumites, thanked God and sent a request to the emperor Justinian 
to obtain a bishop and clergy, so that after instruction he could become 
a Christian. Justinian rejoiced greatly at this and ordered that whichever 
bishop they wanted be given them. The legates, after thorough 
inquiries, chose John the custodian of St John's in Alexandria the Great, 
a devout man, virgin and 62 years old. They took him back with them 
to their own country and to Adad their emperor and so became 
believers in Christ and were baptized all of them.
323

  	


Year of the divine Incarnation 536
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (38 years), 17th year Chosroes, 
emperor of the Persians (48 years), 19th year Vigilius, bishop of 
Rome ( r s years), 6th year
Menas, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 7th year John, 
bishop of Jerusalem (11 years), 10th year Zoïlos, bishop of 
Alexandria (7 years), 2nd year Ephraim, bishop of Antioch (18 
years), 17th year
   In this year on Sunday 6 September of the 7th indiction, a great 
earthquake occurred throughout the world. Half of Kyzikos fell. In the 
same year the great bronze column called Augusteus near the palace was 
completed. The equestrian statue of the emperor Justinian was put on top.
  In the same year there turned up from Italy a man called Andrew, who 
travelled from village to village, and he had a dog that was light coloured 
and blind, which, at his command did amazing
324


things. Andrew would stand in the market, with the crowd surrounding him, 
and unknown to the dog, take gold, silver, and iron rings from the 
bystanders. He would place them on the ground, cover them with earth, and 
give an order to the dog, which would then pick up and return to each 
person his own ring. It could also sort out a jumbled mass of coins according 
to the names of the various emperors. Finally, when asked to point out from 
among a crowd of men and women those who were pregnant, fornicators, 
adulterers, misers, or generous, it would point these all out accurately. So 
they said, 'It has the spirit of Python'.



(AM 6037, AD 544/5)
Justinian, 18th year Chosroes, 
20th year



Vigilius, 7th year 
Menas, 8th year 
John, 11th year 
Zoïlos, 3rd year 
Ephraim, r 8th year
   In this year the sea advanced on [the coast of] Thrace by four miles 
and covered it in the territories of Odyssos and Dionysopolis and also 
at Aphrodision. Many were drowned in the waters. By God's 
command the sea then retreated to its own place.


225	[AM 6038, AD 545/6)
Justinian, 19th year 
Chosroes, 21st year 
Vigilius, 8th year 
Menas, 9th year
Peter, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 1st year 
Zoïlos, 4th year
Domnus, bishop of Antioch (14 years), 1st year
   In this year there was a shortage of corn and wine and much bad 
weather. There was a great earthquake in Byzantium, and an error 
occurred with regard to [the computation of] holy Easter. The people 
began abstaining from meat on 4 February, but the emperor ordered 
that meat be sold for another week. And all the butchers slaughtered 
and put meat up for sale, and no one bought or ate any of it. Easter 
was celebrated as the emperor commanded, so the people continued 
fasting for an additional week.





Justinian, 20th year 
Chosroes, 22nd year 
Vigilius, 9th year Menas, 
10th year Peter, 2nd year 
Zoïlos, 5th year Domnus, 
2nd year
  In this year Rome was captured by the Goths. Pope Vigilius arrived in 
Constantinople and after being received with great honour by the emperor, he 
promised to unite the catholic Church and anathematize the Three Chapters. 
He was so greatly honoured by the emperor that he became puffed up and 
excommunicated Menas, bishop of Constantinople, for four months by way of 
penance. Menas replied by imposing the same penance on Vigilius. The 
emperor, annoyed by Vigilius because of the penance and the delay in fulfilling 
his promises about uniting the Church, dispatched men to arrest him. Vigilius, 
fearing the emperor's wrath, sought refuge in the sanctuary of Sergius the 
martyr in the monastery of Hormisdas. As he was being dragged from there, he 
held on to the columns supporting the altar, and brought them down, for he was 
a large heavy man. The emperor repented and received Pope Vigilius who, in 
tum, at the request of the Augusta Theodora, received

Menas, patriarch of Constantinople, on 29 June, the day of the Holy 
Apostles.
  In the same year on 11 May, on the Saturday of holy Pentecost, when 
the birthday horseraces were taking place, a fight broke out between the 
two factions. The emperor dispatched the excubitors 226   and armed 
soldiers who killed many of them, while many others were choked to 
death while fleeing. Others were cut down and there was a heavy death 
toll.
328
(AM 6040, AD 547/8)
Justinian, 21st year Chosroes, 
23rd year Vigilius, 10th year 
Menas, 11th year Peter, 3rd year 
Zoïlos, 6th year Domnus, 3rd year
   In this year there was a succession of earthquakes and heavy rain, as, for instance, 
the great earthquake in February, where everyone despaired and became very 
frightened and went on litanies and begged God to be saved from the impending 
dangers.
  In the same year, in June of the 11th indiction, the empress Theodora died 
piously.





Justinian, 22nd year Chosroes, 24th year Vigilius, 11th year Menas, 12th year Peter, 4th 
year







329



Zoïlos, 7th year Domnus, 
4th year
  In this year there was much terrifying thunder and lightning, so that many 
were struck by lightning while they slept. On St John's day the thunder and 
lightning were so terrible that part of the column of the Xerolophos was 
sliced off, as was the carved capital of the same column. In July there 
occurred a clash between the two factions and the building known as [the 
house] of Pardos was set on fire. Many things were burned, that is from the 
bronze Tetrapylon to the quarter known as Eleusia. There were also many 
murders. During the [court's] residence at the Hebdomon, the vestitores lost 
the emperor's crown, which was found eight months later. One of its pearls 
and all the remaining jewels were found safe in the same place.
 
AM 6042 [AD 549/50)
Year of the divine Incarnation 542
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (38 years), 23rd year Chosroes, 
emperor of the Persians (48 years), 25th year Vigilius, bishop of 
Rome (18 years), 12th year
Menas, bishop of Constantinople (16 years), 13th year Peter, 
bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 5th year Apolinarios, bishop of 
Alexandria (19 years), 1st year Domnus, bishop of Antioch (14 
years), 5th year
330

   On 13 October of this year, while the races were being held, an   227 
ambassador of the Indians arrived in Constantinople with an elephant
and entered the Hippodrome. In January, the name of Menas, patriarch 
of Constantinople, was demoted, while that of Vigilius was promoted to 
the first place in the diptychs. In March, the elephant broke out of its 
stable during the night, killed many people and maimed others. On 16 
April, in the afternoon, the partisans clashed during the chariot races, 
and many from both factions died. They went to the shops and stole 
whatever they found. John, surnamed Kokkorobios, was prefect at the 
time. On Tuesday 28 June the consecration of [the church of] the Holy 
Apostles took place and the deposition of the holy relics of the apostles 
Andrew, Luke, and Timothy Bishop Menas processed with the holy 
relics, seated in the imperial jewel encrusted golden carriage, holding the 
three caskets of the holy apostles on his knees. In this manner the 
consecration took place.

(AM 6043, AD 550/1)
Justinian, 24th year Chosroes, 26th year





331
Vigilius, 13th year Menas, 
14th year Peter, 6th year 
Apolinarios, 2nd year 
Domnus, 6th year
   In April1 of this year, of the 14th indiction, Narses, the cubicularius was 
sent to Rome with instructions to make war on the Goths who had regained 
Rome. For after Belisarius had won the city, the Goths had risen up and 
recaptured it. On 9 July there was a severe and frightful earthquake 
throughout Palestine, Arabia, Mesopotamia, Syria, and Phoenicia. The 
following cities suffered: Tyre, Sidon, Berytos, Tripolis, and Byblos, and a 
great many people perished therein. In the city of Botrys, a large piece of the 
mountain called Lithoprosopon, which lies close to the sea, was broken off 
and thrown into the sea, so forming a harbour big enough for many large
228.	228	ships to moor there; for previously that city had not had a harbour. 
The emperor sent money for restoring what had fallen in these cities. The sea 
retreated one mile towards the deep and many ships were lost. Later, at 
God's command, it returned to its own bed.





Justinian, 25th year Chosroes, 27th year



332
Vigilius, 14th year Menas, 15th 
year Peter, 7th year
Apolinarios, 3rd year Domnus, 7th 
year
  In this year, during September of the 15th indiction, the consecration of St Eirene 
across the water at Sykai took place. The holy relics were brought from the Great 
Church by two patriarchs, Menas of Constantinople and Apolinarios of Alexandria. 
They both sat in the imperial carriage holding the sacred relics on their knees. They 
went as far as the Perama, then crossed over and the emperor met them. They then 
inaugurated the church of the holy martyr Eirene.
In the same year the harbour of the Hebdomon was cleaned.
  In the same year Menas, bishop of Constantinople, died. Eutychios, the 
apokrisiarios of Amaseia, a monk and presbyter of the monastery at Amaseia, 
replaced him on the same day, while Menas' body was still lying in the sanctuary.
  In August 7 news of victory came from Rome, [sent by] the cubicularius Narses, 
who was exarch of the Romans. He had clashed in battle with Totila, king of the 
Goths, conquered him by arms, taken Rome, killed Totila and sent back to 
Constantinople Totila's bloodstained garments and bejewelled cap. These were 
thrown at the emperor's feet during the secretum. It is necessary to add Anthimos' 
one year to the tenure of the patriarch Menas, to obtain a total of sixteen years.
333
	







Justinian, 26th year 
Chosroes, 28th year 
Vigilius, 15th year
Eutychios, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 1st year Peter, 
8th year
Apolinarios, 4th year Domnus, 
8th year
   In this year the Fifth holy and ecumenical Synod was convened to 
oppose Origen's aberration, Didymos the blind, and Euargios for
228.	229	their pagan nonsense and, once again, the headless Chapters. 
Vigilius of Rome did not attend with those who had gathered.3 After many 
matters had been raised, the emperor dismissed him and he died in 
Illyricum while travelling back to Rome.

334

        Justinian, 27th year
Chosroes, 29th year 
Vigilius, 16th year 
Eutychios, 2nd year
        Peter, 9th year
        Apolinarios, 5th year
        Domnus, 9th year
   On 15 August of this year, in the 2nd indiction, in the middle of the night as 
Sunday was dawning, there was a terrible earthquake. It damaged many homes, 
baths, churches, and part of the walls of Constantinople, particularly near the 
Golden Gate. Many died. Much of Nicomedia also collapsed. The earth 
tremors lasted for 40 days. For a while men were overcome by contrition, went 
on litanies and frequented churches, but after God's mercy had returned, they 
lapsed again to worse habits. The commemoration of this earthquake takes place 
each year in the Campus, with the people performing a litany.
  The Lazi, who had rejected Roman authority because of the avarice and 
injustices of their ruler John, and gone over to the Persians, joined the 
Romans again at this time. The Romans captured the fort of Petra and drove 
out the Persians.
335


AM 6047 [AD 554/5)
Year of the divine Incarnation 547
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (38 years), 28th year Chosroes, 
emperor of the Persians (48 years), 30th year Vigilius, bishop of 
Rome (18 years), 17th year
Eutychios, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 3rd year Peter, 
bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 10th year Apolinarios, bishop of 
Alexandria (19 years), 6th year Domnus, bishop of Antioch (14 
years), 10th year
On 11July of this year, in the 3rd indiction, at the commemoration of St 
Euphemia and the Definition, there was a great earthquake.
228.	230	On the 19th of the same month there was terrible thunder and 
lightning and a violent south west wind, as a result of which the cross that 
stood inside the Rhesion gate fell down.

(AM 6048, AD 555/6)
Justinian, 29th year Chosroes, 
31st year Vigilius, 8th year 
Eutychios, 4th year Peter, 11th 
year Apolinarios, 7th year 
Domnus, 11th year
   In July of this year, the 4th indiction, the Jews and Samaritans staged a revolt 
at Caesarea in Palestine. Combining into a Green Blue faction, they attacked the 
Christians of that city, killed many of them, burned their churches, murdered 
Stephen, the prefect of the city, in the praetorium and looted his property. His wife 
went up to Constantinople and approached the emperor. He ordered Amantius the 
magister militum, to go down to Palestine and investigate Stephen's murder. 
Having found [the culprits] Amantius hanged some, beheaded some, mutilated 
some, and fined others. So great fear prevailed in all the eastern parts. In 
December there occurred a plague among men in various cities, particularly affecting 
children. Similarly in May there was a shortage of bread in Byzantium. The 
people in their distress shouted to the emperor, 'Master, [let us have] plentiful food 
in the city!' They cursed the prefect at the birthday celebrations, while Persian 
ambassadors were present in the Hippodrome. The emperor was annoyed and 
ordered the prefect Musonius to arrest those who had done this, and they were 
punished. They had vexed the emperor because the people had shouted at him in the 
presence of the Persian ambassador. There was plenty of wine and salted meat and 
everything else, but there was a shortage of corn and barley. On Thursday 13 July, 
there was terrifying lightning and thunder resulting in many casualties. There was 
also heavy rain, so that after the long drought the land was soaked.

337




 
Justinian, 30th year
Chosroes, 32nd year
Pelagios, bishop of Rome (5 years), 1st year 
Eutychios, 5th year
Peter, 2th year
Apolinarios, 8th year
Domnus, 12th year
In this year on 6 November on the Commemoration of the Dust, 
there died Timothy, the exarch of the monasteries and abbot of the 
monastery of Dalmatos. Anthimos, an anchorite of the same 
monastery, replaced him.
   Fire appeared in the sky in the shape of a spear, from north to 
west. On Monday 16 April, there was a frightening earthquake that 
caused no damage.


AM 6050 (AD 5 57/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 5 50
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (38 years), 31st year Chosroes, 
emperor of the Persians (48 years), 33rd year Pelagios, bishop of 
Rome (5 years), 2nd year
Eutychios, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 6th year Peter, 
bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 13th year Apolinarios, bishop of 
Alexandria (19 years), 9th year Domnus, bishop of Antioch (14 
years), 13th year
In this year, on Friday 19 October of the 6th indiction there was a great 
earthquake, just as Saturday was dawning On 14 December, there was 
another very frightening earthquake, which damaged the two walls of 
Constantinople, both the Constantinian and the one built by Theodosios. In 
particular, there collapsed churches and the area beyond the Hebdomon, 
namely St Samuel, the Holy Mother of God of Petalas, St Vincent, and many 
church altars and ciboria between the Golden Gate and Rhesion. There was 
no place or suburban estate which did not suffer damage from the terrible 
threat of the earthquake. Rhegion suffered so badly that it was 
unrecognizable. The churches of St Stratonikos and of St Kallinikos, both in 
Rhegion, collapsed to the ground. The porphyry column, which stood in front 
of the palace of Iucundianae with the statue on top of it, collapsed and was 
driven eight feet into the ground. The statue of the emperor, Arkadios, 
which stood to the left of the arch of the Tauros, also fell. There were many 
casualties in the collapsed buildings, though some were rescued even two or 
three days after they had been trapped in the ruins. It was reported that the 
same thing had happened in other cities. No man in that generation on 
earth could remember so great and terrible an earthquake. For the love of 
man the earth continued to shake by day and night for ten days, and for a 
while men went on litanies out 232 of contrition, but after experiencing 
God's love, they lapsed again to worse habits. The emperor did not wear his 
crown for forty days, and even on the holy birth of Christ he processed to 
church without it. He also stopped the customary luncheons in the hall of 
the Nineteen Couches and gave the money saved from this to the poor.
  At the same time the strange race of the so called Avars reached Byzantium and 
everyone in the city thronged to gaze at them, as
339

they had never seen such a people. They wore their hair very long at the back, 
tied with ribbons and plaited. The rest of their dress was like that of the other 
Huns. They had come as fugitives from their own country to Scythia and 
Mysia and sent envoys to Justinian asking to be admitted.
  In February a bubonic plague broke out, particularly among the young, so 
that the living were too few to bury the dead. The plague raged from February 
till July.



340

AM 6051 (AD 558/9)
Year of the divine Incarnation 551
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (38 years), 32nd year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (48 years), 34th year 
Pelagios, bishop of Rome (5 years), 3rd year
Eutychios, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 7th year 
Peter, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 14th year Apolinarios, 
bishop of Alexandria (19 years), 10th year Domnus, bishop 
of Antioch (14 years), 14th year
In this year on Tuesday, 7 May, in the 5th hour, while the dome of the 
Great Church was being repaired (for it had been cracked during the 
preceding earthquakes) and while the Isaurians were working on it, the 
eastern part of the vault of the holy sanctuary collapsed and crushed the 
ciborium, the holy table, and the ambo. The engineers were blamed 
because, to avoid expense, they had not secured the suspension from 
beneath but had bored through the piers that
supported the dome, for which reason these had not held. Realizing
	23
3 this, the most pious emperor erected new piers to hold the dome,
which was built in such a way that it was raised twenty feet higher than 
the first building.
  In the same year the Huns and Slavs, a great mass of them, rose up 
against Thrace, made war there, and killed or captured many people. They 
caught Sergius, the magister militum, son of the presbyter Bakchos, and 
Edermas, the general, [in the service of] Kalopodios, the most glorious 
cubicularius and praepositus. Having discovered that some parts of the 
Anastasian wall had collapsed from the earthquakes, they got in and took 
prisoners as far Drypia and Nymphai and the village of Chiton. Everyone 
fled with their possessions into the city. On being informed of this, the 
emperor conscripted many and sent them to the Long Wall. They engaged 
the enemy there and many Romans, especially scholarii, were killed. 
Then the emperor ordered that the silver ciboria and silver altar tables that 
were outside the city be removed while the scholae, the Protectores, 
the numeri, and the whole Senate guarded all the gates of the Theodosian 
wall. When the emperor saw that the barbarians were persisting, he 
ordered the patrician Belisarius to march out against them with some 
other members of the Senate. Belisarius took every horse, including 
those of the emperor, of the Hippodrome, of religious establishments, and 
from every ordinary man who had a horse. He armed his troops and led 
them out to the village of Chiton. He made an entrenched camp and began 
to capture some of the enemy and kill them. Next he ordered
341






trees to be cut and dragged behind the army. The wind blew up a 
cloud of dust, which drifted over the barbarians. They, thinking that an 
enormous force was there, fled and went to the district of St 
Stratonikos at Dekaton. When they learned from scouts that a
234 great garrison force was at the walls of Constantinople, they went to the 
region of Tzouroulon, Arkadioupolis, and St Alexander of Zoupara and 
remained encamped there until holy Easter. After the Easter festival, the 
emperor went out to Selymbria and everyone from the city went with 
him to rebuild the Long Wall where the barbarians had entered. The 
emperor remained there until August. Likewise the barbarians 
wandered about outside the city until August. Then the emperor ordered 
double prowed ships to be built to go to the Danube and oppose the 
barbarians as they crossed and make war on them. When the barbarians 
discovered this, they asked through an envoy to be allowed to cross the 
Danube safely. The emperor sent Justin, his nephew, the curopalates. 
to conduct them.

342

343




[AM 6052, AD 559/60)
Justinian, 33rd year Chosroes, 
35th year Pelagios, 4th year 
Eutychios, 8th year Peter, 15th 
year Apolinarios,	1th 
year
Anastasios, bishop of Antioch (11years), 1st year
  In this year the emperor began to build the bridge over the river Sangarios. 
After diverting the river into another bed, he built five imposing arches and so 
made it possible to cross the river, where previously there had only been a 
wooden bridge.

344

(AM 6053, AD 560/1)
Justinian, 34th year 
Chosroes, 36th year 
Pelagios, 5th year 
Eutychios, 9th year Peter, 
16th year Apolinarios, 
12th year Anastasios, 2nd 
year
In this year, on Thursday, 9 September, of the 9th indiction, a rumour 
arose in Constantinople that the emperor had died. For he had returned 
from Thrace but did not receive anyone. So the people suddenly seized the 
bread from the bread shops and bakeries, and at about the third hour no 
bread could be found in the whole city. There was also a downpour of 
rain that day. The shops were closed and the common talk at the palace 
was that the emperor had not granted an audience to any senator because 
he had a headache. For this reason it was believed that he had died. 
About the ninth hour the Senate called a meeting and sent the prefect to 
have lights lit throughout the city to show that the emperor was well. In 
this way
the city was calmed after the disturbance. After the emperor had	235 
recovered, the ex-prefect Eugenios accused George, the curator of
the palace of Marina, and Aitherios, curator of the palace of Antiochos, 
of having intended to make Theodore, son of Peter the magister, 
emperor, with whom Gerontios, the City prefect, was in accord. When 
the matter had been investigated and disproved, Eugenios came under 
displeasure, and his house was confiscated. He sought refuge in the 
church and was saved.
  In December there was a large fire in Julian's harbour, and many houses 
were burned as well as churches from the edge of the harbour as far as the 
quarter of Probus. There was also a big plague at Anazarbos and 
[elsewhere] in Cilicia and in Great Antioch, as well as earthquakes. The 
orthodox and the supporters of Severus clashed with one another and 
there were many murders. The emperor dispatched Zemarchos, comes 
Orientis, and checked the troublemakers, many of whom were punished 
by exile, confiscation of property, and mutilation.
345





Year of the divine Incarnation 554
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (38 years), 35th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians ( 48 years), 37th year John, 
bishop of Rome ( 8 years), 1st year 
Eutychios, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 10th year Peter, 
bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 17th year Apolinarios, bishop of 
Alexandria (19 years), 13th year Anastasios, bishop of Antioch 
(11years), 3rd year
346

On Wednesday, 12 October of this year, in the 10th indiction, late in 
the evening, there was a big fire in the quarter of Caesarius as far as 
Omphakera, as it is called. All the shops and portals as far as the 
[Forum of] the Bull were burned. In November, during the races, 
before the emperor's arrival, a riot among the partisans broke out. The 
Greens attacked the Blues. When the emperor heard, he went up to the 
Kathisma and, on seeing the fighting, ordered Marinus, comes
excubitorum, with the curator of the estate of Caesarius to go down
	2
36 and separate the factions. They went off but were unable to disperse
them. Many from both factions were killed and many others wounded. 
The Blues then invaded the Greens' seats, chanting, 'Bum here, bum 
there. Not a Green anywhere.' In return the Greens chanted, 'Come, 
come, everybody, everybody!' They went to the Mesê to the quarters of 
the Blues and stoned those they encountered chanting, 'Set alight, set 
alight! Not a Blue in sight.' They invaded the quarters as Sunday was 
dawning and stole property. The emperor ordered the Greens to be 
arrested, and they were punished with many tortures. The Blues sought 
refuge in the church of the Mother of God at Blachernai. The Greens 
who stole out sought refuge in St Euphemia at Chalcedon. The prefect 
ejected them and punished them. Their wives and mothers began to 
shout in the churches at the emperor that he grant indulgences to the 
Greens. They were driven off with sticks and the emperor was not 
reconciled to the Greens until Christmas.
  In February the emperor ordered that of the men of the seven 
scholae, those who were stationed at Nicomedia, Kios, Prousa, 
Kyzikos, Kotyaeion, and Dorylaion, leave and take up quarters in 
Thrace, that is in Herakleia and the surrounding cities. In March the 
scholae rose up against their comes because of some payments they 
used to receive which had been abolished; so they attacked him. 
Theodore Kondocheres, the son of Peter the magister, chanced to be 
there and by a threatening speech managed to appease them.
  In the same year Obaisipolis was captured by the Huns. The emperor 
sent out his nephew Marcellus, the magister militum, with a large force to 
rescue both this city and Persis. In April
Anastasioupolis in Thrace was also captured by the same Huns.	237
  On 3 May Zemarchos, curator of the palace of Placidia, was 
accused of making many terrible statements against the emperor by 
George, curator of the palace of Marina, and by John the ex consul, 
both relatives of the empress Theodora.
347


348
  



Justinian, 36th year Chosroes, 
38th year John, 2nd year 
Eutychios, 11th year Peter, 18th 
year Apolinarios, 14th year 
Anastasios, 4th year
   In October of this year, a riot among the people occurred in the quarter of 
Pittakia, and the emperor punished a great many. In November there was a drought 
and water became scarce, resulting in many fights around the fountains. (Since) 
August a north wind had blown and none from the south. Ships could not reach 
Constantinople so Eutychios, the patriarch, ordered a litany to [the quarter of] 
Jerusalem, that is to St Diomedes.
  In the same month the patrician Narses sent news of victory from Rome. He 
announced that he had captured from the Goths two fortified cities, Beroia and 
Bringas.
  On the 25th of the same month, on Saturday evening, certain individuals formed 
a plan to murder the emperor while he was sitting in the palace. They were 
Ablabios, the former musical composer, Marcellus, the banker, and Sergius, the 
nephew of the curator Aitherios. This was their plan. While the emperor was sitting 
in the triclinium in the evening before dismissing the company, they would rush in 
and kill him. They had as helpers some of their own men, Indians hidden in the 
office of the silentiaries and in the Archangel's [chapel] and in the Harma, who 
were to cause a disturbance while the plot was carried out. The same Ablabios had 
accepted money from Marcellus the banker, fifty pounds in all, to join in the task. 
But, with God's consent, Ablabios confided in Eusebios, the honorary consul and 
comes foederatorum, and also John the logothete, the [son] of Domentziolos, 
saying: 'This evening we intend to attack the emperor.' After informing the
349
238.	238	emperor, [Eusebios] arrested them and discovered that they 
were wearing concealed swords. The banker Marcellus, having failed in 
his plan, drew the sword he was wearing, gave himself three blows 
when he was apprehended in the triclinium, and died. Sergius, the 
nephew of Aitherios, ran away and sought refuge [in the church] at 
Blachernai. They dragged him from the church, interrogated him, and 
persuaded him to confess that Isakios, the banker, and even Belisarius, 
the most glorious patrician, were implicated in the same conspiracy and 
that Vitus, the banker, and Paul, the curator of Belisarius, were privy to 
the plot. After all of them had been arrested and handed over to the 
prefect Prokopios, they testified and gave evidence against the patrician 
Belisarius. The emperor immediately became vexed with Belisarius. 
Many fled. On 5 December the emperor held a silentium, invited the 
most holy patriarch Eutychios, and ordered the depositions to be read 
out. On hearing them, Belisarius was greatly upset and incurred the 
emperor's wrath. The emperor ordered the removal of all his staff and 
put Belisarius under house arrest.
  On 24 December the consecration of the Great Church took place for 
the second time. The all night vigil of the consecration took place at St 
Plato's. Eutychios, the patriarch of Constantinople, set out from there 
with the litany, accompanied by the emperor. Eutychios sat in the 
carriage wearing the apostolic habit and holding the holy Gospel, while 
everyone sang the psalm, 'Raise up your gates, you leaders.
  In the same month some districts of Africa were occupied by the 
Mauretanians, who had risen in revolt in Africa in the following 
manner. A man of this tribe named Koutzinas, who was leader of the 
Mauretanians, had customarily received from the serving governor of 
Africa a fixed amount of gold. But when he came to collect it,
238.	239	John, the governor of Africa, killed him. Koutzinas' sons rose 
up to avenge their father's blood and, falling on Africa, captured some 
parts of it which they plundered. At the news of this, the emperor sent 
to the assistance of Africa his nephew Marcian, the magister militum, 
with an army to pacify the Moors. They went over to him and Africa 
gained peace.
  In April Prokopios was dismissed from the city prefecture and replaced 
by Andrew, the ex logothete. As he came out of the palace through the 
Chalke, seated in his carriage on his way to the Praetorium, the Greens 
met him at the palace of Lausos. They began to insult him and throw 
stones at him. This led to a big disturbance of the two factions in the 
Mesê They broke into the prisons and fighting went on from the tenth 
hour. The emperor sent out
350

his nephew Justin, the curopalates, who chased them away. But they clashed 
again about the twelfth hour, and they were arrested and paraded publicly for 
many days. Those who had fought with swords had their thumbs cut off.
  On 19 July the patrician Belisarius was received and given back all his 
honours. Peter the magister arrived from Persia after securing a peace treaty 
for seventeen years, a result of [events in] Lazica and the eastern regions. In 
the same month envoys arrived (in Constantinople) from Askel, king of the 
Hermichiones, who dwell inland of the barbarian nation near the Ocean. In 
August there was a shortage of water, so that the public baths were closed and 
murders occurred at the fountains.

351




Year of the divine Incarnation 556
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (38 years), 37th year Chosroes, 
emperor of the Persians (48 years), 39th year John, bishop of 
Rome (8 years), 3rd year
Eutychios, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 12th year
352


Peter, bishop of Jerusalem (10 years), 19th year Apolinarios, 
bishop of Alexandria (19 years), 15th year Anastasios, bishop 
of Antioch (11 years), 5th year
In this year, in October of the 12th indiction, the emperor Justinian, in 
fulfillment of a vow, visited Myriangeloi, otherwise known as Germia, a city 
in Galatia. In November, Arethas the patrician and phylarch of the Saracens, 
came to Byzantium, since he was obliged to report to the emperor which of 
his sons, after his death, would obtain his phylarchy, and to discuss the 
activities of Ambros, son of Alamoundaros in his territory. In December a 
great fire broke out, and the hospice of Sampson was completely gutted as too 
were the buildings in front of the quarter of Rufus and also the middle court, 
near the Great Church (the one called Garsonostasion) and the two 
monasteries near St Eirene, along with its middle court and part of its 
narthex.




Justinian, 38th year 
Chosroes, 4oth year John, 
4th year Eutychios, 13th year 
Peter, 20th year Apolinarios, 
16th year Anastasios, 6th 
year
   In March of this year, in the 13th indiction, Belisarius the patrician died 
in Byzantium, and his property accrued to the imperial house of Marina. On 
12 April of the same 13th indiction, Eutychios, patriarch of Constantinople, 
was deposed and banished to Amaseia by Justinian. He was replaced by 
John, the ex scholasticus, an apokrisiarios of Great Antioch and presbyter 
of the same Church.
353





241   In the same year, the emperor Justinian, after raising the doctrine 
of Corruptibility and Incorruptibility and issuing an edict to all places 
that was contrary to piety, with God acting in time, died on 14 
November of the following 14th indiction, having reigned 38 years, 7 
months, and 13 days. His successor was his nephew Justin, the 
curopalates.
  In the same year the Theodosians and the Gaianitai in Alexandria began 
to build conventicles. The Gaianitai, acting on their own authority, 
ordained as their own bishop their archdeacon Elpidios. The emperor 
ordered that Elpidios be brought to him in chains. On the journey, he 
died at Sigris. The Theodosians secretly ordained Dorotheos one night 
as their bishop. Then the Gaianitai and Theodosians united and 
enthroned a common bishop for themselves. The Gaianitai, thinking that 
a certain monk called John had devised a plot, tore off his beard, along 
with his skin and flesh.



AM 6058 (AD 565/6)
Year of the divine Incarnation 558
Justin, emperor of the Romans (13 years), 1st year
354

Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (48 years), 41st year John, bishop 
of Rome (8 years), 5th year
John, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 1st year 
Makarios, bishop of Jerusalem (2 years), 1st year 
Apolinarios, bishop of Alexandria (19 years), 17th year 
Anastasios, bishop of Antioch (11 years), 7th year
In this year on 14 November of the 14th indiction, Justinian's nephew 
Justin became emperor and was crowned by the patriarch John, the ex 
scholasticus. Justin was a Thracian by race, magnanimous and capable in 
all matters and an avid builder. He had a wife named Sophia whom he 
crowned Augusta. Being pious, he adorned
the churches built by Justinian, namely the Great Church, the Holy   242 
Apostles, and other churches and monasteries, granting them plate
and a full revenue. He was thoroughly orthodox. He sent out the monk 
Photeinos, stepson of the patrician Belisarius, with authority to deal with 
all people and issues, in order to pacify all the churches of Egypt and 
Alexandria. 4

355





Justin, 2nd year Chosroes, 42nd 
year John, 6th year
John, 2nd year Makarios, 2nd 
year Apolinarios, 18th year 
Anastasios, 8th year
   In this year Aitherios and Audios and their physician plotted against the 
emperor Justin and, on being found out, were executed by the sword. Justin gave 
consular largess and scattered much money, and thus enriched many.
  In the same year the monk Agathon, a brother of Apolinarios the bishop of 
Alexandria, after coming to Alexandria and having examined the accounts of 
Eustochios, a monk who was at the time important and oikonomos of Alexandria, 
imprisoned him because of his stewardship. Eustochios escaped through the roof 
and came to Byzantium just when Makarios had been expelled from the Church 
as a result of a plot. Eustochios was ordained bishop of Jerusalem in place of 
Makarios.



(AM 6060, AD 567/8)
Justin, 3rd year Chosroes, 
43rd year John, 7th year
John, 3rd year
Eustochios, bishop of Jerusalem (1 year), 1st year Apolinarios, 
19th year
Anastasios, 9th year
In this year Sophia, the most pious Augusta, summoned the bankers and 
money-lenders and ordered that the contracts and receipts of debtors be 
brought. Having read them, she took the receipts and handed them over to 
the debtors and repaid the amounts to their owners. For this she was greatly 
praised by the whole city.
  Eustochios, out of hatred towards Apolinarios, Agathon, and Makarios, 
went to Jerusalem and expelled the monks of the New Lavra on the grounds 
of Origenism. Because of this he was deposed and Makarios was restored 
again to his throne.

357

243	[AM 6061, AD 
568/9)
Justin, 4th year 
Chosroes, 44th year 
John, 8th year
John, 4th year
Makarios, bishop of Jerusalem again (4 years), 1st year 
John, bishop of Alexandria (11 years), 1st year 
Anastasios, 10th year
In this year when the chariot races had been held and quarrelling was 
breaking out among the factions, the emperor sent proclamations to 
each of the factions, saying to the Blues, 'The emperor Justinian is 
dead and gone from among you', and to the Greens, 'The emperor 
Justinian still lives among you'. When the factions heard this, they 
became quiet and quarrelled no longer.
  In the same year he began to build the palace of Sophianai, named 
after his wife Sophia, on the pretext that before he had become 
emperor and while he was still curopalates his son Justus had been 
buried there, in the church of the Archangel in that area. He 
decorated it with a variety of expensive marbles.



Justin, 5th year Chosroes, 
45th year
Benedict, bishop of Rome (5 years), 1st year 
John, 5th year Makarios, 2nd 
year John, 2nd year 
Anastasios, 11th year
   In this year the emperor Justin began to build the palace of Deuteron on 
the estate which he owned before becoming emperor. He also built [a palace] 
by the harbour of the island of Prinkipos, where he likewise had an estate, as 
well as the church of the holy Anargyroi in the quarter of Darios. He 
restored the public bath of the Tauros and named it Sophianai after his wife 
Sophia.
  In the same year Anastasios, the great bishop of Antioch, after he had 
criticized in his rescript the synodical letter of John of Constantinople, who 
had ordained John of Alexandria, was expelled from his own see following 
that man's ordination because of Justin's anger. Gregory, a monk and 
apokrisiarios of the monastery of the Byzantines, was then ordained.

359



Justin, 6th year Chosroes, 46th 
year Benedict, 2nd year John, 
6th year Makarios, 3rd year 
John, 3rd year
Gregory, bishop of Antioch (24 years), 1st year
In this year Narses, the cubicularius and protospatharios, the one
244 who was beloved by the emperor Justin (whom he abused), built the house of Narses 
and the monastery of the Cathars. When the emperor Justin heard that his own nephew, 
whom he had appointed augustalis in Alexandria, was hatching a plot against the 
emperor, he sent orders to have him beheaded.
Justin, 7th year Chosroes, 
47th year Benedict, 3rd year 
John, 7th year Makarios, 4th 
year John, 4th year Gregory, 
2nd year
In this year Justin began to build the church of the holy apostles Peter and 
Paul in the Orphanage, and the church of the Holy Apostles in the Triconch (the 
one that had been burned during the reign of Zeno). To the church of the holy 
Mother of God at Blachernai he added two arches, the northern one and the 
southern one, that is in the great church, and made it cruciform.
  In the same year the Romans and Persians destroyed the peace and the Persian 
War was renewed once again because the Homerite Indians sent an embassy to 
the Romans and the emperor sent Julian, the magistrianus with an imperial 
letter to Arethas, the emperor of the Ethiopians. [Julian travelled] from 
Alexandria, along the river Nile and the Indian sea and was received by 
emperor Arethas with great delight since he desired the friendship of the 
Roman emperor. Julian, on his return, described that at his reception emperor 
Arethas was [nearly] naked. From his belt to his loins he had gold-threaded 
linen cloth. Over his stomach he wore straps of precious pearls. On each arm he 
had five bracelets and gold rings on his hands. Round his head was wound a 
gold-threaded linen turban, with four tassels hanging from each of the two knots, 
and round his neck was a gold collar. He stood on top of four upright elephants 
which supported a yoke and four disks and, above those, something like a lofty 
chariot adorned with gold leaf, like the carriages of provincial governors. He 
stood on top of this carrying a small gilded shield and two golden lances. His 
whole senate, under arms, was there singing musical refrains. So after the 
Roman envoy had been brought in and had made his obeisance, he was ordered 
by the emperor to arise and be led to him. After receiving the emperor's letter, 
[Arethas] kissed the seal which bore the emperor's portrait bust. 245
361

And on receiving the gifts, he rejoiced greatly. When he read the letter, he 
discovered that it contained [instructions] for him to take up arms against the 
emperor of the Persians and to destroy the land of the Persians that lay close 
to him and, in the future, not to have any dealings with the Persians, but to 
carry on trade through the territory of the Homerites, which he had subjected, 
along the Nile as far as Alexandria in Egypt. The emperor Arethas 
immediately gathered his army before the eyes of the Roman envoy and 
declared war against the Persians, sending ahead those Saracens who served 
under him. He himself proceeded against the Persian land and destroyed all 
that there was of it in those parts. The emperor Arethas took Julian by the 
head, gave him the kiss of peace and released him in great favour and with 
many gifts.
  There was another reason which disturbed Chosroes. For at that time the 
Huns, whom we are accustomed to call Turks, sent an embassy to Justin via 
the territory of the Alans. Being fearful of this, Chosroes alleged that there 
had been an uprising of the Armenians against him and that they had gone 
over to Justin, and demanded the refugees. For the Roman emperor used to pay 
annually 500 pounds of gold to the Persians to guard the forts near that region 
so that invading tribes would not destroy their respective states. Thus the 
forts were guarded at joint expense. But Justin ended the peace claiming that 
it was disgraceful that the Romans should be levied for tribute by the 
Persians. For this reason this great war arose between the Persians and the 
Romans. Justin appointed Martin, who was a patrician and a kinsman of his, 
as magister militum per Orientem and sent him out against the Persians.

362

363






Year of the divine Incarnation 565
Justin, emperor of the Romans (13 years), 8th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (48 years), 48th year 
Benedict, bishop of Rome (5 years), 4th year
John, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 8th year John, 
bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 1st year
John, bishop of Alexandria (11years), 5th year Gregory, 
bishop of Antioch (24 years), 3rd year
In this year on 6 October the emperor fell ill and became vexed with his 
own brother Badouarios, whom he insulted to the utmost, commanding the 
cubicularii to eject him during a silentium while pummeling him with their 
fists. Badouarios was comes of the imperial stables. When Sophia learned 
about this, she was distressed and upbraided the emperor. He repented and 
went down to Badouarios immediately, entering the stable with the 
praepositus of the cubicularii. On seeing the emperor, Badouarios fled from 
corner to corner in fear of the emperor. The emperor cried out, 'My brother, I 
beseech you by God, wait for me'. And running forward, Justin grabbed him, 
embraced and kissed him, saying, 'I wronged you, my brother, but do accept 
me as your eldest brother and as your emperor. For I know that it was 
through the work of the devil that this has happened.' The other fell before 
his feet and said in tears, 'Truly, master, yours is the power; but having 
vilified your slave in the presence of the Senate, will you now, master, 
make an explanation to them.' And he pointed to the horses. The emperor 
invited Badouarios to dine with him, and they made peace.


  In the same year a great battle took place near Sargathon between the 
Persians and the Romans in which the Romans were victorious.


[AM 6066, AD 573/4]
Justin, 9th year
Hormisdas, emperor of the Persians (15 years), 1st year Benedict, 
5th year
John, 9th year John, 
2nd year John, 6th 
year Gregory, 4th 
year
   In this year the Avars came to the regions of the Danube, and the 247 
emperor, having learned of this, dispatched Tiberius, the comes excubitorum, 
against them. After clashing with them and sustaining a sudden attack, he was 
defeated and retreated with heavy losses.
  Hormisdas, the emperor of the Persians, appointed Ardamanes as 
general and sent him to cross the Euphrates and to ravage Roman 
territory. He himself, after collecting his forces, took up a position 
against the Romans who were besieging Nisibis. When Martin learned 
this, he abandoned Nisibis and retreated to Roman territory. Ardamanes, 
coming close to Antioch, and having destroyed
365

the city's suburbs, advanced on Koile Syria. Thus Ardamanes captured many 
prisoners and returned to his own country. The emperor Justin, suffering acutely from 
these events, dismissed Martin from his command and appointed Archelaos magister 
militum. Ardamanes captured Daras and then returned. And having learned of this, 
Justin, in consternation at the greatness of the disaster, was plunged into a deranged 
state and begged Hormisdas to make peace. Hormisdas agreed to make a treaty for 
one year.



Year of the divine Incarnation 567
Justin, emperor of the Romans (13 years), 10th year Hormisdas, emperor 
of the Persians (15 years), 2nd year John, bishop of Constantinople (12 
years), 10th year John, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 3rd year
366

John, bishop of Alexandria (11 years), 7th year Gregory, bishop 
of Antioch (24 years), 5th year
   In this year the emperor Justin, having adopted Tiberius the comes 
excubitorum as his son, proclaimed him Caesar, and made him sit as his 
partner at the chariot races and on holidays. For the emperor's feet were 
afflicted and he reclined for much of the time.



[AM 6068, AD 575/6]
Justin, 11th year Hormisdas, 
3rd year John, 11th year
John, 4th year John, 8th 
year Gregory, 6th year
In this year Justin repaired the great aqueduct of Valens and supplied the city with 
abundant water. 1



Justin, 12th year Hormisdas, 
4th year John, 12th year
John, 5th year John, 9th 
year Gregory, 7th year
In this year the emperor Justin took away the synagogue of the Hebrews, the 
one in the Chalkoprateia, and built the church of our Lady, the holy Mother of 
God, which is near the Great Church.
367


  In the same year on 31 August in the 10th indiction, John, the bishop of 
Constantinople, died.





Justin, 13th year 
Hormisdas, 5th year
Eutychios, bishop of Constantinople again (4 years), 1st year John, 
6th year
John, 10th year 
Gregory, 8th year
In this year, in October of the 11th indiction, Eutychios regained the throne of 
Constantinople. 
  The emperor, who was ill, but rallied a little from his sickness, 
summoned the archbishop, the Senate, all the priests, and those who held 
office. Having brought forward the Caesar Tiberius, he proclaimed him 
emperor in the presence of all, using these very words: 'Behold, it is God, 
not I, who has done you good and has conferred this rank upon you. 
Honour it that you be honoured by it. Honour your mother who was 
previously your queen. You know that first you were her slave, but now 
you are her son. Do not rejoice in bloodshed. Have no share in murder. Do 
not return evil for evil. Do not become like me in enmity; for I have erred 
like a man. And having erred, I have received according to my sins. But I 
shall bring to justice before Christ's tribunal those who have done that to 
me. Do not let this rank elate you as it did me. But attend to all as you 
attend to yourself. Remember who you were and who you are now. Do not 
be arrogant, and you will not do wrong. You know who I was, and who I 
became and what I am. All these are your children and your slaves. 
Remember that I have honoured you ahead of my own blood. Those whom 
you see here are the whole of the state. Pay attention to your
249	soldiery. Shun soldiers. Let no one say of you that your predecessor
368


behaved in this way. For I speak from my own experience. Let those who have 
possessions enjoy them; be bountiful to those who have none.' After a prayer by 
the patriarch and after all had said 'Amen', the Caesar fell before the emperor's 
feet and the emperor said to him, 'If you wish it, live; if you wish it not, I die. God 
himself, who made heaven and earth, will plant in your heart all that I have 
forgotten to tell you.' As he was saying these things the emperor filled his 
audience with tears. When the gathering had been dismissed, Tiberius distributed 
gifts to his subjects and everything else that is customary at imperial 
proclamations.





Year of the divine Incarnation 571
Tiberius, emperor of the Romans (4 years), 1st year Hormisdas, 
emperor of the Persians (15 years) 6th year Eutychios, bishop of 
Constantinople (4 years), 2nd year John, bishop of Jerusalem (20 
years), 7th year
John, bishop of Alexandria (11years), 11th year Gregory, bishop of 
Antioch (24 years), 9th year
 In this year in the month of October, indiction 12, Tiberius became emperor, 
having been crowned by the patriarch Eutychios, as already mentioned. He, too, 
was a Thracian by descent. When he became emperor, the factions chanted in 
the Hippodrome, 'Let me know, let me know, the Augusta of the Romans'. 
Tiberius sent a message saying, 'What is the name of the church which is 
opposite
369

the public baths of Dagistheus? The Augusta has the same name.' The factions 
chanted, 'Anastasia Augusta, Tu vincas. Preserve, O Lord, those whom you 
have ordered to rule.' When Sophia, the wife of Justin, heard this, she was 
stricken in her soul. For she wanted to marry Tiberius and remain Augusta, but 
she did not know that he
250 had a wife. Some said that even during Justin's lifetime, she had taken Tiberius as 
her lover and she had persuaded Justin to make him Caesar. But Tiberius 
brought in Anastasia, whom he had sent for; she was his wife and he had two 
daughters by her, Charito and Constantina. He crowned her Augusta and 
distributed a large amount as consular largess.




370

[AM 6072, AD 579/80)
Tiberius, 2nd year Hormisdas, 
7th year Eutychios, 3rd year 
John, 8th year
Eulogios, bishop of Alexandra (27 years), 1st year Gregory, 10th 
year
   In this year the emperor Tiberius built the palace that is by the harbour of 
Julian and named it after Sophia, the wife of Justin. He established her in it, 
granted her cubicularii for her own service, commanded that she be 
honoured as his mother, built her a bath and every other amenity. He 
dispatched envoys to the emperor of the Persians to inform him, as was 
customary, of his accession. The emperor of the Persians did not accept 
peace. Thereupon Tiberius gathered great forces and scattered the imperial 
funds to create more armies. He appointed a certain Justinian magister 
militum per Orientem, who took command of the forces and came before 
Daras. Likewise the Persians, commanded by Tamchosroes, made camp near 
them. When their lines had been drawn up, they parleyed and reached a 
mutual agreement whereby the Romans and the Persians would cause no 
damage in the East for a three year period, but would continue hostilities in 
Armenia.


37!



Tiberius, 3rd year 
Hormisdas, 8th year 
Eutychios, 4th year John, 
9th year Eulogios, 2nd 
year Gregory, 11th year
   In this year the emperor of the Persians gathered his forces and 
marched to Armenia. When the Roman general heard that the Persian 
emperor was planning to make war in person, he became unnerved; for 
fear came upon the army of the Romans. And so Justinian made a speech 
to the army to put an end to such cowardice among the troops.
251 When battle was joined, the arrows of the Persians were so thick that they 
hid the rays of the sun. The Romans, repulsing the showers of arrows 
with their shields, began the battle in close order. The Roman formation 
was so deep that the Persians were unable to withstand it. And the mass 
of the Babylonians was turned in flight and a great many were killed. The 
Romans captured the Persian baggage, the royal tent and all of its 
magnificent equipment. The Romans even captured the elephants and 
sent Tiberius these notable and royal spoils. Accordingly the Persian 
emperor, unable to bear this disgrace, decreed that in future no Persian 
emperor was to campaign in person. The Roman army exploited the 
Persians' misfortunes by advancing deep into Persian territory where they 
took many captives and wrought much destruction, reaching up to the 
middle of the Hyrcanian sea. When winter came, the Romans did not 
return home, but wintered in Persia.
  In the same year Tiberius began to build the public bath at Blachernai 
and restored many churches, hostels, and houses for the aged. He 
directed his name be written into the official documents as Tiberius 
Constantine.

372


[AM 6074, AD 581/2]


Tiberius, 4th year Hormisdas, 
9th year
John, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 1st year John, 10th 
year
Eulogios, 3rd year Gregory, 
12th year
   In this year on 6 April, indiction 15, the patriarch Eutychios died and after 
six days John the Faster, a deacon of the Great Church, was ordained. The 
emperor Tiberius, having bought contingents of aliens, formed them into an 
army bearing his own name, 15,000 men whom he clothed and armed. He 
appointed as their general Maurice, lie the comes foederatorum, with Narses as 
his second in command. Then he sent them against the Persians. A great war 
was fought, in which the Romans were victorious through strength of arms. 
They took away from the Persians the cities and lands which the latter had 
captured in the times of Justinian and Justin. When Maurice returned to 
Constantinople, he was received with great honour by the emperor. Tiberius 
celebrated a 252    triumph for Maurice's victories and acquired him as his 
son in law [by marriage] to his own daughter Constantina. Similarly he joined 
his daughter Charito to the general Germanus and made both Maurice and 
Germanus Caesars.
  On 14 August, indiction 15, after eating early mulberries that looked 
marvellous but were spoilt, he fell into a consumption. Being on the point of 
death, he summoned the patriarch John and the Senate together with the army 
to the Tribunal. He was carried in on a litter, and being unable to speak, he 
announced to the populace by means of a prepared statement what was 
advantageous for the affairs of the Romans, and proclaimed his own son in law 
Maurice as emperor. After everyone had acclaimed the emperor's wish and
373


Maurice as emperor, Tiberius, having gone back to his couch, died, having 
ruled for three years, ten months, and eight days.



Year of the divine Incarnation 575
Maurice, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 1st year Hormisdas, 
emperor of the Persians (15 years), 10th year John, bishop of 
Constantinople (13years), 2nd year
John, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 11th year Eulogios, 
bishop of Alexandria (27 years), 4th year Gregory, bishop of 
Antioch (24 years), 13th year
   In this year Maurice became emperor, being 43 years old. Soon afterwards, 
when his father Paul had come to Byzantium, he celebrated his marriage. 
Marites, who was chief eunuch of the palace, was best man.
  In April there was a conflagration in the Forum, and squalls of wind fanned 
the fire which destroyed many houses. On 10 May there was a big earthquake; 
everyone sought refuge in the churches and the anniversary chariot races were 
not held.
   In the same month the Avars sent an embassy to the emperor Maurice. A 
little earlier they had captured Sermium, a notable
374


	city in Europe and now demanded that the 80,000 gold pieces which they 
received annually from the Romans should be increased by another    253 
20,000. The emperor out of eagerness for peace accepted this. [The Chagan] 
asked for an elephant, an Indian animal to be sent to him so he could look at it. 
The emperor sent to him the largest one of all. After gazing at it the Chagan sent 
it back to the emperor. Likewise he asked for a golden bed to be sent to him. The 
emperor sent it and again the Chagan returned it after disparaging it. He then 
asked for another 20,000 to be added to the 100,000. When the emperor refused 
the Chagan marched out destroyed the city of Singidunum and captured many 
other cities belonging to Illyricum. He seized Anchialos and threatened to 
destroy the Long Walls. The emperor sent out the patrician Elpidios with 
Komentiolos as ambassadors to the Chagan. The barbarian vowed to keep the 
peace in accordance with the terms of the treaty.
	In the East the emperor made John Mystakon general of Armenia. Having 
come to the river Nymphios, where it joins the Tigris he clashed in war with 
Kardarigas the general of the Persians, and the Romans vanquished the 
barbarians. (Kardarigas is not a proper name but is the highest rank among the 
Persians.) But Krous the second-in-command, out of jealousy and envy retreated. 
When the rest of the Romans saw him they too turned and barely reached their 
palisade. When a second clash took place, the Romans were defeated and many 
of them were destroyed.



Maurice, 2nd year 
Hormisdas, 11th year 
John, 3rd year
John, I2th year
Eulogios, 5th year Gregory, 
14th year
In this year on 25 December, indiction 2, lithe emperor was pro­ claimed 
consul and gave much treasure to the City. He promoted Philippikos as 
magister militum per Orientem after making him his brother in law 
through his sister Gordia. Philippikos set out for Persian territory and 
came close to Nisibis. He invaded Persia suddenly and took a great 
number of prisoners. When Kardarigas, the Persian general, learned this, 
he set a trap seeking to ambush 254   the Roman armies. But 
Philippikos, keeping his prisoners secure, invaded the land of the Medes 
by going over the mountains, destroyed many places in Media, and then 
returned to Roman territory.
  The Chagan hastened to break the peace through treachery. For he 
armed the tribes of the Sklavini against Thrace. They wrought much 
devastation, coming as far as the Long Walls. The emperor, after leading 
out the palace guard and the demes from the City, ordered them to 
protect the Long Walls. He appointed Komentiolos as general, equipped 
his forces, and sent him out against the barbarians. He fell upon the 
barbarians unexpectedly, destroyed a great many of them, and drove them 
back. When he reached Adrianople he came upon Ardagastos who was 
leading a mass of Sklavini along with their captives. He fell upon him, 
saved the captives, and gained a great victory.



376






Maurice, 3rd year Hormisdas, 
12th year John, 4th year
John, 13th year Eulogios, 
6th year Gregory, 15th 
year
   In this year Philippikos, taking up the army, set out for Persian territory. He 
reached Arzanene, where he won many captives and brought fear to the 
Persian army. But falling ill, Philippikos went to Martyropolis, after 
appointing Anepsich to command the troops with Stephen as commander of 
the tagmata Kardarigas attacked Martyropolis, burned all its suburbs, and 
then retired. Philippikos returned ill to Constantinople and the army retired 
home safely.
  In the same year a son was born to the emperor who named him 
Theodosios.




Maurice, 4th year Hormisdas, 
13th year John, 5th year
John, 14th year Eulogios, 
7th year Gregory, 16th 
year
   In this year Philippikos left the imperial city and encamped by the city of 
Amida. Having mustered the soldiers, he asked them if they were eager to 
march to war. When the Romans had assured him
under oath that they would wage war eagerly, he advanced to	25 5 
Arzamon. When Kardarigas learned this, he dismissed the report
377
with a laugh, believing it was a dream. Having summoned the magi, asked them 
who would gain the victory. These worshippers of demons alleged that the Persians 
would be given victory by the gods. So the Persians rejoiced at this, gladdened by 
the promises of the magi, and immediately began making wooden fetters of timber 
and iron to put on the Romans. The Roman general exhorted the troops not to harm 
the farmers' work, so that the justice of God (which hates evil) would not transfer 
the victory to the barbarians. On the. following day the general sent out two 
phylarchs of the Saracens, who captured some Persians alive, through whom they 
found out about their opponents' movements. These men claimed that the 
bar­barians planned to attack the Romans on the Lord's day. So, early in the 
morning, Philippikos drew up the Romans in three phalanxes and went to meet the 
enemy. He himself, taking up the image of the God man, which the Romans believe 
not to have been made by human hands, went through the ranks and gave the 
soldiers a share of the divine power. Standing behind the marshaled ranks and clasp­ 
ing this weapon, he propitiated the divine with many tears, lie and so received 
additional help from the heavenly host.5 When battle was joined, Vitalian, the 
taxiarch, moving more boldly than all the oth­ers, broke the Persian phalanx and 
captured their baggage. The Romans began to busy themselves with plunder. When 
Philippikos saw them, he became afraid that the rest would also turn to plunder and 
forget their battle line and that the barbarians would wheel around and destroy them. 
So he placed his own helmet on Theodore Ilibinos and sent him out to strike with his 
sword those who were engrossed in the spoils. When they saw him, believing he 
was Philippikos, they left the spoils and went back to battle. After the fighting had 
continued for many hours, a command came from the general to strike the Persian 
horses with their spears. 256   When this had been done, the Persian army was 
routed and the Romans won a great victory. They killed many men whose bodies 
they stripped. On the next day Kardarigas gathered his forces and armed them for 
battle once again. In the second encounter the Romans were again victorious and 
many Persians were killed. Two thousand of them were captured alive and sent to 
Byzantium. Kardarigas sought refuge in Daras, but the Persians sent him away with 
much abuse. Philippikos sent out his second in command Herakleios (the father of 
the emperor Herakleios) to spy on the barbarians, while he himself conveyed those 
who had been wounded in the campaign to the cities for medical treatment. After 
gathering his forces, he invaded Babylonia and besieged the fort of Chlomaron. 
Kardarigas enlisted peasants with their beasts of burden and, having collected
	378

this mob, boasted that he had an army on campaign. Going through secure 
places on a dark night, he reached the rear of the Romans, by no means daring 
to attack them. It But an untimely fear came upon Philippikos who, leaving 
the fort, fled without reason. When the Romans realized this, they turned to 
flight and fell into great danger in country that was hard to traverse. For the 
night was moonless. When the sun rose, they escaped misfortune. After they 
reached the general, they abused him with the vilest insults. The Persians, 
believing that the flight had been feigned, did not dare to pursue them. 
Herakleios, after crossing the Tigris, set on fire all the more important places 
of the Median country and then returned to Philippikos with much booty.

379

257	AM 6079 [AD 586/7)
Year of the divine Incarnation 579
Maurice, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 5th year Hormisdas, 
emperor of the Persians (15 years), 14th year John, bishop of 
Constantinople (13 years), 6th year
John, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 15th year Eulogios, 
bishop of Alexandria (27 years), 8th year Gregory, bishop of 
Antioch (24 years), 17th year
   In this year the Chagan of the Avars, after breaking the peace treaty, 
made war on Mysia and Scythia, where he wrought terrible destruction 
on Ratiarna, Bononia, Akys, Dorostolos, Zardapa, and Markianoupolis. 
Komentiolos went to Anchialos and, after dividing his army, segregated 
the worthless from the brave. He ordered the non-effective force of 
40,000 to protect the ramparts; the select troops numbered 6,000, of 
which he handed 2,000 to Castus, 2,000 to Martin, and, taking 2,000 
himself, he marched against the barbarians. Castus, having come to 
Zardapa and the Haimos and finding that the barbarians were in disorder, 
destroyed many of them. Having taken a large number of captives, he 
gave them to a bodyguard for safe keeping. Martin, having reached the 
district near the city of Tomis, came upon the Chagan unexpectedly and 
killed many of his force, so that the latter had to purchase his safety by 
flight. Having gained this glorious victory, Martin returned to the spot 
where the general had promised to wait for them. But Komentiolos, 
overcome by cowardice, had retreated to Markianoupolis. When they 
could not find him, they collected their own forces and encamped by the 
narrow passages of the Haimos. When Martin saw the Chagan crossing 
the river, he returned to his    258   general. But Castus crossed the river 
and drew close to the vanguard of the Avars whom he defeated in battle. 
But, prompted by some dark demon, he did not return to the general. On 
the next day the Chagan occupied the crossings and hemmed him in. 
Accordingly, the troops were split and each man fled through the woods as 
best he could. Some, who were captured by the barbarians, revealed where 
Castus was hidden. When he had been taken alive, the barbarians danced 
around him in exultation. The Chagan, marching by way of Mesembria, 
moved against Thrace and reached the Long Walls. Komentiolos, who had 
hidden in the forests of the Haimos, came out with Martin. Having caught 
the Chagan completely unprepared, with the mass of his barbarians 
scattered across Thrace, he marched against him at the first watch. He 
would have won great success from this attempt had he not missed his goal 
by ill luck. For
380


when the load on one animal had slipped, a man called to the animal's 
master to put the load right, speaking in his native tongue, Torna, 
torna, frater. The driver of the mule did not hear the words, but the 
army heard them and suspecting that the enemy were upon them, 
turned to flight shouting torna, torna in loud voices. Even so, the 
Chagan fled headlong with great cowardice, and one could see Avars 
and Romans running away from each other with no one in pursuit. 
After gathering his forces, the Chagan besieged the city of Apeiria. 
After capturing Bousas, the city's engineer, the Chagan prepared to 
kill him. But Bousas offered to give him a large sum of money if his 
life was spared. So those who had bound him brought him before the 
city and Bousas asked the city's inhabitants to ransom him, relating all 
his services on the city's behalf. But one citizen persuaded the crowd 
not to do this, the story being that he was sleeping with Bousas' wife. 
So when Bousas was spurned, he 259   promised to hand over the 
city to the Chagan, and, after constructing a siege machine which 
they call a ram, captured the city. The barbarians, having learned this 
technique, enslaved a great many other cities and returned with a 
large body of captives. When the Byzantines heard that Castus had 
been taken prisoner by the barbarians, they abused Maurice greatly 
and insulted him openly.
  At this time Herakleios, the father of Herakleios, attacked a Persian 
fort and captured it. Similarly Theodore took the fort of Mazaron. 
Both then went to Beioudes. Since that fort was strong, a certain 
soldier named Sappheres contrived some stakes and, inserting them in 
the joins of the masonry, made the ascent. When he climbed up to the 
top of the wall a Persian pushed him off. So Sappheres fell down and 
the Romans caught him on their shields. He again made the bold 
attempt and was again pushed off the wall and again the Romans 
caught him on their shields and again he made his attempt. When he 
got to the top of the wall, he beheaded the Persian. Then he threw 
down the head as though it were consular largess, and filled the 
Romans with confidence. After many had imitated his valour and, 
using the pegs, had climbed the wall, the fort was surrendered to the 
Romans, who killed some of the Persians, took others as prisoners 
along with their equipment and the fort. Philippikos again made his 
way to Byzantium, leaving Herakleios as commander of the Romans. 
When he got to Tarsos and learned that the emperor had appointed 
and sent out Priscus as magister militum per Orientem, he wrote to 
Herakleios to leave the army to Narses and to go to Armenia and to 
inform him of Priscus' coming. For the emperor (who had the disease 
of avarice) had 260   ordered Philippikos to deprive the army of a 
quarter of their pay.
3
8
1
Philippikos, out of fear that this would provoke an uprising, did not 
obey the emperor and because of this forfeited his command. Priscus, 
after reaching Antioch, ordered the soldiers to gather at Monokarton. 
He summoned Germanus, who had been entrusted with the 
governorship of Edessa, together with the bishop, and set out with 
them for the camp in order to celebrate Easter with them. The officers 
of the army met him with the standards two miles from the camp. But 
Priscus, contrary to custom, did not dismount from his horse nor did 
he use the customary greetings. This was the origin of the dislike 
shown to him. For soldiers do not take kindly to being insulted in 
public. After Easter he haughtily revealed the emperor's rescript. 
Thereupon the soldiers rushed in a body on the general's tent, some 
with swords, others with stones, and others with sticks. Priscus became 
thoroughly scared, mounted his horse, and fled speedily from the 
danger. The soldiers broke into his tent and looted all his possessions. 
When he reached Constantia he was treated by physicians for his 
bruises from the stoning and for other wounds. He dispatched the city's 
bishop to plead his case to the army, promising that he would 
persuade the emperor not to deprive them of any of their customary 
pay. The army dismissed the bishop with insults and proclaimed 
Germanus as general against his will, raising him aloft on a shield, 
and they overturned the imperial statues and destroyed his images. 
And they would have gone as far as actual revolt and would have 
looted the cities had not Germanus prevented them by his many 
admonitions and exhortations. Priscus informed the emperor about all 
this and the emperor reappointed Philippikos as magister militum per 
Orientem.
261		Priscus then returned to Byzantium, but the army confirmed on oath 
that they would by no means accept Maurice as emperor. The 
barbarians reveled in these misfortunes of the Romans. In The emperor 
sent out Aristoboulos, the curator of the imperial estates, to the army 
in order to put an end to the revolt by oaths and gifts, which he did. 
Once the revolt had been ended, a very great battle took place 
between the Persians and the Romans at Martyropolis. The Romans by 
their power and leadership overcame the Persians, and the Persian 
general, Marouzas, was killed. 3,000 were taken alive including the 
taxiarchs of the Persian tagmata. Only a thousand were saved who got 
back to Persia with difficulty. The Romans sent to the emperor many 
of the Persian spoils and all the prisoners together with their standards.
  Maurice built the Carian portico at Blachernai and had painters 
depict in it all his deeds from his childhood until his reign. He also 
completed the public bath which is at the portico.
382




AM 6080 [AD 587/8]
Year of the divine Incarnation 5 80
Maurice, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 6th year Hormisdas, emperor 
of the Persians (15 years), 15th year John, bishop of Constantinople (13 
years), 7th year
John, bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 16th year Eulogios, bishop of 
Alexandria (27 years), 9th year Gregory, bishop of Antioch (24 
years), 18th year
In this year, in the month of September, indiction 6, the Lombards made war on 
the Romans and the tribes of the Moors caused great trouble in Africa.
  In Persia there is a prison called Lethe2 in which the emperor of the Persians 
had shut up many people from various races along with the prisoners from the 
city of Daras. They, despairing for their lives, rose up against their guards and 
having killed Marousas, they took   262 his head with them and went to 
Byzantium. The emperor received them with great joy. The army barely 
recognized Philippikos as its general. In a battle, which took place between 
Persians and Romans at Martyropolis, the Romans were defeated. The emperor, 
after relieving Philippikos once more of his command, sent Komentiolos as 
magister militum per Orientem. After arriving close to Nisibis, Komentiolos 
clashed with the Persians at Sarbanon. Herakleios, the father of Herakleios, won 
great glory in the battle and killed the Persian general. After Aphraates' death 
the Persians were routed and pursued by the Romans, who took many captives. 
They also seized the baggage and sent quantities of booty to Byzantium. The 
emperor cheered the city with displays of horseracing and public festivals, and 
celebrated the victories with a triumph.
  Hormisdas, (the emperor of the Persians), after appointing Baram as general, 
sent him with a large army to Souania, where he made an unexpected attack so 
that the Turks were thoroughly defeated by the Persians. This so strengthened 
Hormisdas that he was able to exact a tribute of 40,000 gold coins from the Turks, 
whereas previously he had been paying the Turks the same amount. Baram, who 
had gained much glory in this war, made his camp by the river Araxes, and 
when Maurice learned this, he appointed Romanus as general and sent him to 
Souania with an army. After Romanus had reached Lazica and came to the river 
Phasis, he began campaigning in Albania. When Baram heard that the Roman 
army had arrived, he poured scorn on their efforts and was eager to try out the 
Romans in battle. For he had not previously fought against the Romans. So he 
crossed the adjoining river to try to draw the Romans deeper into Persian territory. 
Romanus divided the Roman force, leaving the inexperienced men with the 
baggage. 263  He took 10,000 select troops and marched against the 
barbarians, with 2,000 ordered to act as a vanguard. These met the Persian 
vanguard, routed them, and destroyed all of them. For in their flight they had 
come to a cliff and, being hemmed in, they all perished. The Romans came right 
up to the barbarians' palisade and so struck terror into Baram. When Romanus 
heard this, he exhorted his troops and drew them up on the Albanian plain. 
Baram tried to steal the battle by trickery but failed in his purpose, for Romanus 
was endowed with intelligence. The clash occurred and, with a multitude of 
barbarians killed, the
385
Romans had a great victory. The barbarians were stripped and, 
deprived of burial, became food for the wild beasts. When the emperor 
of the Persians heard about this, he could not bear the disgrace and 
dispatched female clothing to Baram, whom he dismissed from his 
command. Baram thereupon revolted and tried to usurp power. In turn 
he abused Hormisdas in a letter, which he entitled as follows, 'Baram 
addresses these words to Hormisdas, the daughter of Chosroes'. Then, 
having gathered the troops, he alleged that Hormisdas was angry with 
them for having been defeated by the Romans. He showed them a 
forged letter, purportedly from Hormisdas, on the reduction of soldiers' 
pay, and reminded them that Hormisdas was harsh and extremely 
cruel, avaricious, and violent, how he loved slaughter while rejecting 
peace, how he subjected the grandees to chains, beheaded some with 
the sword and drowned others in the Tigris, how he forced the 
Persians to be involved in huge wars in order to destroy them and 
prevent them from rising up against him. Hurling such words at the 
troops, Baram kindled a great revolt against Hormisdas. After 
swearing oaths of loyalty to Baram they all declared that they would 
destroy Hormisdas.
264 Hormisdas armed his magister Pherochanes and sent him with a force 
against Baram. But Baram declared to Pherochanes and his troops that 
Persians ought not to bear arms against Persians and reminded them 
of Hormisdas' harshness and injustice, of his bloodlust and delight in 
murder, of his unreliability, arrogance, and violence. When 
Pherochanes' troops perceived that these words had been spoken truly, 
they went over to Baram and, after killing Pherochanes, united with 
Baram and set out for Ctesiphon.
  Hormisdas had Bindoes, a man of high rank, placed in chains. 
Things being in great commotion, Bestan, who was Bindoes' brother, 
burst into the prison and rescued his brother Bindoes, and after 
assembling a throng of peasants and city dwellers, they entered the 
palace at the third hour of the day. Having found Hormisdas sitting 
regally on his throne, they assailed him with much abuse. Bindoes, 
having seized Hormisdas, removed the diadem from his head and had 
him put in prison. He then invited Chosroes to lay claim to his ancestral 
throne. Hormisdas sent a messenger from the prison requesting the 
opportunity of explaining to the Persians what was profitable for 
Persia. This was done on the following day when the Persian senate 
assembled in the palace with the people, and Hormisdas was led out 
as a prisoner. Hormisdas then told the Persians that emperors ought 
not to be wronged in this way, and reminded them of the many 
triumphs he had gained since becoming emperor, of the benefits he had 
conferred on the Persians, and how
386

he had made the Turks tributary to Persia and forced the Romans to seek 
peace and how he had captured Martyropolis. He also related to them the 
achievements of his ancestors. He deemed it right that Chosroes should 
be deprived of the empire since he was litigious, greedy, delighting in 
blood, contemptuous, insolent and a warmonger. But he did have 
another son and he exhorted them to 265appoint him as emperor. 
Bindoes spoke against Hormisdas and, by exposing his errors, aroused 
everyone against Hormisdas. They brought forward Hormisdas' wife 
and son and before Hormisdas' eyes, cut them in two. Hormisdas was 
then blinded and imprisoned. For a while, Chosroes treated his father 
kindly in prison, providing him with every pleasure. But Hormisdas 
responded to this with abuse and by trampling on the emperor's 
offerings. In anger Chosroes ordered that Hormisdas be beaten on his 
flanks with rough clubs until he died. This grieved the Persians and led 
them to hate Chosroes. Chosroes assembled his forces, left the palace 
to tackle Baram, and proceeded to the plain of the river Zabas where 
Baram was entrenched. Supposing that some of his officers were 
attached to Baram, Chosroes executed them. When this caused a 
commotion among the troops, Chosroes fled with a few supporters, and 
all of Chosroes' troops went over to Baram. Chosroes was at a loss 
what to do, some advising him to go to the Turks, and others to the 
Romans. Mounting his horse, Chosroes gave it free rein and 
commanded everyone to follow the horse's direction. The horse moved 
in the direction of Roman territory. When Chosroes reached Kerkesion, 
he dispatched envoys to inform the Romans of his arrival. The patrician 
Probus, who chanced to be there, received him and informed the 
emperor by letter of what had occurred. Baram, for his part, dispatched 
envoys to Maurice requesting him not to make an alliance with 
Chosroes. The emperor Maurice ordered the general Komentiolos to 
receive Chosroes at Hierapolis and to treat him with regal honour.
In the same year the emperor Maurice introduced a litany at	266
Blachernai in memory of the holy Mother of God, at which laudations 
of our Lady were to be delivered. He called it a panegyris.





AM 6081 (AD 5 88/9)
Year of the divine Incarnation 581
Maurice, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 7th year Chosroes, emperor 
of the Persians ( 39 years), 1st year
388



John, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 8th year John, 
bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), nth year Eulogios, bishop 
of Alexandria ( 27 years), 10th year Gregory, bishop of 
Antioch (24 years), 19th year
In this year the emperor Maurice, having adopted Chosroes, emperor of 
the Persians, as his son, sent to him his kinsman Dometianus, bishop of 
Melitene, with Narses to whom he had entrusted the command of the 
war. They invaded Persia with Chosroes and the entire Roman forces. 
When Baram learned this, he collected the forces at his disposal and 
camped at a place called Alexandrina, where he intended to prevent the 
armies that were marching from Armenia from uniting with Narses. For 
Maurice had ordered John Mystakon, the magister militum per 
Armeniam, to take his armies and unite with Narses so that they might 
jointly make war on Baram. During the night all the Roman forces were 
united and were drawn up against Baram. But Baram, seized with fear, 
camped by a hill. In the terrible clash of battle, Narses, scorning the Indian 
beasts, broke the central phalanx of the barbarians. When this had 
happened, Baram's other phalanxes gave way and the usurper's forces fled 
in great numbers. Narses pursued and killed the Persians without 
restraint, and brought back to Chosroes 6,ooo prisoners. Chosroes 
executed them all by the spear. All the Turks were sent to the emperor in 
Byzantium. The Turks had on their foreheads the symbol of the cross 
tattooed in black, and when   267   asked by the emperor how they 
came to have that sign, they said that many years earlier there had been a 
plague in Turkey and some Christians among them had suggested doing 
this and from that time their country had been safe. The Roman army, 
after capturing Baram's tent and baggage along with the elephants, 
brought them to Chosroes. Baram made his escape to the inner regions of 
Persia, and in this way the war against him ended. Chosroes, having won 
a great victory, regained his throne and gave a victory banquet for the 
Romans. But Narses, as he was about to return home, said to Chosroes, 
'Remember the present day, Chosroes. It is the Romans who have 
graciously granted you your empire.' Chosroes, in fear of being 
assassinated, asked Maurice for a bodyguard of 1,000 Romans. Maurice, 
who had a great love for the barbarian, fulfilled his request. And so the 
Romans' Persian war came to its conclusion.






Year of the divine Incarnation 582
Maurice, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 8th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (39 years), 2nd year 
John, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 9th year John, 
bishop of Jerusalem (20 years), 18th year Eulogios, 
bishop of Alexandria (27 years), nth year Gregory, 
bishop of Antioch (24 years), 20th year
In this year on 26 March, indiction 8, on the day of holy Easter, 
Theodosios, the 4 and a half year old son of Maurice, was crowned by 
John, patriarch of Constantinople. In the same year the emperor Maurice 
completed the church of the Forty Saints, which Tiberius had begun. 
It was on the Mesê on the site where it was said the Praetorium had 
previously stood.
  While a deep peace prevailed in the East, the Avar War seethed in 
Europe. For this reason the emperor Maurice transferred his armies 
from the East to Thrace.


268	[AM 6083, AD 590/1]
Maurice, 9th year Chosroes, 3rd year John, 10th year John, 19th year







390

Eulogios, 12th year 
Gregory, 21st year
 In this year, at the beginning of spring, when the tagmata had reached 
Thrace, Maurice went out with them to see the devastation caused by 
the barbarians. The Augusta, the patriarch, and the Senate begged the 
emperor not to conduct the war in person but to entrust it to a general. 
But he did not accept this. When he had gone out to the Hebdomon 
there was an eclipse of the sun. There were also roaring gales from a 
violent south wind. On reaching Rhegion, he consoled the crowds of 
the poor with silver. When the emperor went hunting, a huge wild boar 
charged the Caesar. His horse, in terror of the sight, tried to toss the 
Caesar, but though it remained refractory for a long time, it was not 
able to throw him. The boar, unharmed by anyone, went away. Then, as 
he was making his journey by sea to Perinthos, there were violent 
winds and rain and the sailors were in despair while the emperor's ship 
was driven on until it was saved unexpectedly at a place called 
Daonion. During the night a woman gave birth and uttered piteous 
cries. In the morning the emperor sent to see what would be the 
outcome. They saw a newborn child without eyes or eyelids and having 
neither hands nor arms but, at its hips, a tail that would have suited a 
fish. (When the emperor saw this, he ordered that it be destroyed.) That 
day the emperor's horse, which was adorned with gold trappings, 
suddenly fell and died. Seeing all these as omens, the emperor was 
deeply grieved. On the next day three men, Sklavini by race, who 
carried no iron weapons but only lyres, were overpowered by the 
Romans. The emperor asked them where they had come from and 
where they dwelt. They said that they were Slavs by race and that they 
lived by the edge of the western Ocean, and that the Chagan had sent 
an embassy to them with gifts for their tribal leaders so that they would 
make an alliance with him
against the Romans. Their taxiarchs had dispatched them to reply to 269 the 
Chagan that they were unable to lend him support because of the
length of the journey. For they said that they had been travelling for eighteen months 
and had thus come to fall into the hands of the Romans. They were carrying lyres since 
they did not know how to use any weapons, their own country being ignorant of iron. 
The emperor, amazed at their youth and bodily stature, commended them and sent them 
to Herakleia. When the emperor reached Anchialos and learned that envoys had come to 
Byzantium from the Persians and the Franks, he returned to his palace. 		391



Maurice, 10th year 
Chosroes, 4th year John, 
11th year John, 20th year 
Eulogios, 13th year 
Gregory, 22nd year
   In this year the Chagan sought to receive additional payments to those 
agreed, but the emperor refused to accede to the barbarian's demands. For this 
reason the Chagan began war again, besieged Singidunum and marched 
against Sermium. The emperor appointed Priscus as magister militum for 
Europe. Priscus, after making Salvianus his second in command, ordered him 
to take the advance party. After they had advanced against the barbarians, battle 
was joined and the Romans were victorious. When the Chagan heard this, he 
collected his forces and set out for war. Salvianus, having seen their numbers, 
was struck with terror and returned to Priscus. On being informed of the 
Roman retreat, the Chagan advanced to Anchialos, that is to St Alexander's, and 
delivered it to all-devouring fire. Then, having crossed over to Drizipera,  he 
tried
392



to sack the town by making use of siege engines. The inhabitants of 
Drizipera held their ground against them with feigned boldness. For, 
after opening the gates, they threatened to do battle with the barbarians, 
although, in fact, they were terribly scared. But it was then indeed that 
some divine force came to their assistance. For in the middle of the day 
the barbarians imagined they saw a Roman army marching out of the 
city, ready to engage them, and, being struck with terror, they ran away 
in urgent flight and went to   270 Perinthos. Priscus, unable even to 
behold the masses of the barbarians, went into the fort of Tzouroulon and 
made himself secure. The barbarians attempted to besiege Priscus. When 
Maurice heard this, he was at a loss what to do, but by sound judgement 
he outwitted an immense army. He persuaded one of the excubitors by 
large gifts and promises to fall willingly into the hands of the barbarians. 
He gave to this man a letter addressed to Priscus of which the contents 
were as follows: 'To the most glorious general Priscus: Do not fear the 
nefarious attempt by the barbarians, which will bring about their 
destruction. For you are to know that the Chagan will have to return in 
great disgrace to the territory assigned to him by the Romans. For this 
reason your Glory will persist in making them wander about Tzouroulon. 
We are sending ships by sea and we are carrying off their families as 
captives, and he will be compelled to return to his territory disgraced 
and punished.' The Chagan, having caught and read the letter, was 
terrified, and entered on an agreement with Priscus, making peace for a 
few trifling gifts, and then fled hastily back to his own land.


393


[AM 6085, AD 592/3)
Maurice, 11th 
year Chosroes, 
5th year John, 
12th year
Amos, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 1st year 
Eulogios, 14th year
Gregory, 23rd year
   In this year the emperor Maurice sent Priscus with all the Roman 
armies to the river Danube to prevent the tribes of the Sklavini from 
crossing. The Chagan learned that he had reached Dorostolos and sent 
envoys to him, accusing the Romans of starting a war. Priscus 
countered this as follows: 'I have not come here to make war on the 
Avars, but was sent by the emperor against the Sklavini.' Having heard 
that Ardagastos had scattered hordes of Sklavini to plunder,
271 Priscus crossed the Danube in the middle of the night and made an 
unexpected attack on Ardagastos. The latter, perceiving the danger, 
mounted a horse bareback and just escaped to safety. The Romans, 
after destroying hordes of Sklavini, laying waste the territory 
surrounding Ardagastos and taking captives, sent many of them back 
to Byzantium! le with Tatimer. Tatimer became careless as he made his 
journey in a relaxed fashion, indulging in drunkenness and pleasure, 
and, on the third day, hordes of Sklavini attacked him. Overcome by 
cowardice, Tatimer went fleeing to Byzantium. But the Romans who 
were with him fought the Sklavini valiantly and, after unexpectedly 
defeating the barbarians, brought the captives safely to the emperor at 
Byzantium. The emperor was pleased and offered hymns of 
thanksgiving to God together with all the people of the city.
  Priscus was emboldened to march into the interior territory of the 
Sklavini. Gepid who belonged to the Christian religion deserted to the 
Romans and revealed to them the entrance [into their country]; and so 
they defeated the barbarians. He said that Mousoukios, the king of the 
barbarians, was at a distance of thirty miles. Thanks to the Gepid's 
betrayal, Priscus crossed the river in the middle of the night and found 
Mousoukios overcome by strong drink; for he was celebrating the 
wake of his own brother. After taking him alive, Priscus wrought great 
slaughter among the
394

barbarians. Having taken many prisoners, they gave themselves over to 
drink and pleasure. The barbarians, gathering together, attacked their 
conquerors, and their revenge would have been even harsher than the act 
of valour that had preceded it, if Genzon had not arrived with the 
Roman infantry and checked the barbarian charge in a tough battle. 
Priscus impaled those who had been entrusted with guarding him.
  In the same year Paul, the emperor's father, died in Constantinople 
and was buried among the imperial tombs. Likewise the Augusta 
Anastasia, the mother-in-law of Maurice and wife of the emperor 
Tiberius, [died and] was buried with her husband Tiberius.

AM 6086 (AD 593/4)
	
272
Year of the divine Incarnation 586
Maurice, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 12th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (39 years), 6th year 
John, bishop of Constantinople (13 years), 13th year 
Amos, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 2nd year Eulogios, 
bishop of Alexandria (27 years), 15th year Gregory, 
bishop of Antioch (24 years), 24th year
In this year Priscus again advanced to the Danube and plundered the tribes 
of the Sklavini and sent back many captives to the emperor who 
dispatched Tatimer to Priscus and ordered the Romans to spend the 
winter season there. On being informed of this, the Romans objected, 
saying that it was not possible to do so because of the numbers of the 
barbarians, the hostile country, and the unbearable cold. But Priscus 
persuaded them with convincing arguments to
395

winter there and carry out the emperor's command.l la3 The emperor 
Maurice, having heard this, appointed Philippikos, 4 who was his 
brother-in-law and magister militum per Orientem, as comes excu­ 
bitorum, having confidence in him because he was married to his sister. 
Philippikos began to build at Chrysopolis5 the monastery of our all-holy 
Lady, the Mother of God, and a palace there for the reception of the 
emperor Maurice and his children. He made within it fish-ponds and parks 
for his pleasure. In Constantinople he built the house known as that of 
Philippikos. 6



(AM 6087, AD 594/5)
Maurice, 13th year Chosroes, 7th 
year
Kyriakos, bishop of Constantinople (11years), 1st year
Amos, 3rd year Eulogios, 
r 6th year
Anastasios, bishop of Antioch (again) (6 years), 1st year
In this year two monsters were born in the suburbs of Byzantium, namely a 
four-footed child and another with two heads.  Careful 
273 historians affirm that good is not portended for cities in which such beings 
are born. The emperor relieved Priscus of his command and made his own 
brother Peter general of the Roman army. Before Peter's arrival Priscus 
collected his army and crossed the river. When the Chagan heard about the 
crossing by the Roman army, he was
396


greatly amazed and sent emissaries to Priscus seeking both to learn the 
reason and to obtain a share of the booty and so also get across the river: 
for he was much annoyed by the Roman successes. To treat these matters 
Priscus sent as his ambassador to the Chagan Theodore the physician, 
who was both intelligent and shrewd. When Theodore saw that the 
Chagan was being presumptuous and giving replies that were rather 
boastful (for he was threatening that he would become master of all of 
the tribes), he softened this barbarian arrogance with an old tale. For he 
said, 'Listen, 0 Chagan, to this helpful tale. Sesostris, the emperor of the 
Egyptians, who was famous and exceedingly fortunate, brilliantly 
wealth and invincible in power, had subjected many mighty nations. So, 
having become boastful, he made a carriage inlaid with gold and 
precious stones and sat in it, forcing four of the conquered emperors under 
the yoke to pull the carriage. When this was happening at an important 
festival, one of the four emperors often turned back his gaze and stared 
at the wheel turning round. When Sesostris asked him why he caused his 
eyes to gaze backwards, the man said: "I am amazed at the wheel which 
is never at rest but always moving its various parts, at one moment putting 
down the mighty and at another raising up the lowly." Sesostris, after 
reflecting wisely on the parable, ordained that the emperors were no 
longer to pull the carriage.' When the Chagan heard this, he smiled and 
said that he would keep the peace and that it was up to Priscus as to 
whether he wished to honour the Chagan with any of the spoils. Priscus 
gave the captives  to the
Chagan on account of the crossing and, taking all the spoils, went
	27
4 over the river without danger. The Chagan was greatly pleased to receive 
what he did. Priscus went to Byzantium and Peter took over
the command.


397

[AM 6088, AD 595/6)
Maurice, 14th year
Chosroes, 8th year
Kyriakos, 2nd year
Amos, 4th year
Eulogios, 11th year
Anastasios, 2nd year
In this year the emperor ordered Peter the general to give the Romans one third of their 
pay in gold, one third in arms, and the remaining third in all kinds of clothing. So when 
the Romans heard this, they turned to revolt. In fear, the general replied to the soldiers 
that this was not true, and he showed the army another letter instructing him that those 
who had served with valour and survived the dangers were to be given rest in the cities 
and fed in their old age at public expense, and that the children of soldiers were to be 
enrolled in the place of their parents. With these persuasive arguments he placated the 
troops, and they acclaimed the Caesar. Peter informed the emperor of these things. 
Having come top Markianoupolis he sent ahead a force of 1,000 to be the vanguard. They 
came upon Sklavini, who were taking a large amount of plunder from the Romans, and 
routed them. But the barbarians, after slaughtering their captives and capturing many 
prisoners, returned to Roman territory. In the same year the emperor built the circular 
terrace of the Magnaura. He set up a statue of himself in the central court and placed the 
arsenal there.
 



Maurice, 15th year Chosroes, 
9th year Kyriakos, 3rd year 
Amos, 5th year Eulogios, 
18th year Anastasios, 3rd 
year
   In this year the general Peter, while hunting/ encountered a wild boar 
which crushed his foot against a tree. He was ill for a long time with 
intolerable pain. The emperor assailed him with bitter letters and intolerable 
insults on hearing that Slav tribes were moving against Byzantium. So Peter 
went in haste to Novae. The leading soldiers of the city together with the 
bishop went to
meet the general. When the general saw them, he admired their   257  equipment 
and manliness and ordered them to leave the city and
join the Roman army. But the soldiers, who had been appointed to the city's 
garrison, refused to comply.4 In fury, the general dis­ patched Genzon with 
a force of soldiers. When they learned this, the others fled to the church, 
closed its doors, and remained inside. Genzon, out of reverence for the 
church, waited without taking any action. Peter angrily dismissed Genzon 
from his command and sent a skribon to bring the bishop to him in dishonour. 
But those from the city assembled with their entire households and drove the 
skribon ignominiously from the city. They then closed the city gates, 
acclaimed the emperor Maurice, and hurled insults at the general. Thus 
Peter retreated from there in disgrace. 
  He sent forward a thousand to reconnoiter. They encountered a thousand 
Bulgars. The latter, made confident by the Chagan's peace, were advancing 
without any precautions. The Romans charged the Bulgars. The Bulgars sent 
out seven men to request that the peace be not broken. When the advance 
party heard this, they reported it to the general, who replied, 'Not even if 
the emperor came here, would I spare them.' A battle took place and the 
Romans
399


were routed. The barbarians did not pursue them lest, after their victory, 
they should fall into danger. The general scourged the commander of the 
vanguard severely. When the Chagan learned this, he sent envoys to 
Peter accusing him of causing [the incident] and saying that the Romans 
had broken the peace for no just reason. Peter, with deceitful words, 
claimed that he knew nothing of the attack and that he would restore all 
the plunder twofold. So the barbarians, having regained double their lost 
plunder, kept the peace.
  Peter then marched against Peragastes, the leader of the Sklavini, but 
the barbarians met the Romans at the bank of the river and prevented 
them from crossing. But the Romans, shooting from their
276 boats, turned them back. In the rout Peragastes was struck in the groin and 
died. After crossing, the Romans gained much plunder and returned to 
their own territory. But the guides went astray and fell into a waterless 
region and so put the army in danger. So they marched through the night 
and reached the river Helibakias. On the other side of the river there was 
a thicket in which the barbarians hid and shot at those who were 
drawing water. And so the Roman army, suffering heavy casualties and 
thoroughly beaten by the barbarians, turned and fled. When Maurice 
heard the news, he dismissed Peter from his command and sent out 
Priscus again as general of Thrace.


400

AM 6090 (AD 597/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 5 90
Maurice, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 16th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (39 years), 10st year 
Kyriakos, bishop of Constantinople (11 years), 4th year Amos, 
bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 6th year
Eulogios, bishop of Alexandria (27 years), 19th year Anastasios, 
bishop of Antioch (6 years), 4th year
   In this year the general Priscus, after setting out for Thrace, held a 
review of his forces and found that a great many of them had been lost. 
Collecting those he had, he went to Novae on the river Ister. When the 
Chagan learned this, he sent envoys to inquire about the reason of his 
arrival. Priscus claimed that he had come to hunt. 'But it is not right', 
said the Chagan, 'to go hunting in foreign territory.' But Priscus claimed 
that it was his territory and reproached the Chagan for leaving the East. 
The barbarian then destroyed the walls of Singidunum and marched into 
Roman territory. When Priscus learned this, he went to the island of the 
Ister, and taking some dromones, reached the Chagan at Constantiola, 
wishing to parley with him. When the Chagan had come to the bank of 
the
river, Priscus spoke to him from his ship. The Chagan said to him   277 
'What is your concern, Priscus, with my land? Do you wish to take
it deceitfully from my hands? God will judge between me and the 
emperor Maurice. He shall seek out from his hands the blood of the 
Roman army and of my army.' Priscus then said, ('Give back the city of 
Singidunum to the Romans.') The Chagan replied, 'You are trying to take 
a single city from us. Soon you will see fifty Roman cities made subject 
to the Avars.' Priscus, after bringing up the ships along the river to 
Singidunum, captured it, drove the Bulgars out of it, and began to build 
the walls. The Chagan sent messengers to him and called to witness his 
false gods, charging Priscus with what was happening. When winter 
came, both sides returned to their own territories.
  In the same year Peter, the brother of Maurice, built the church of the 
holy Mother of God in the Areobindos quarter, adorning it with various 
marbles. Similarly the patriarch Kyriakos built the church of the holy 
Mother of God in the quarter of Diakonissa.
401




Maurice, 17th year
Chosroes Kyriakos
11th year 5th year

Amos 1 7th year 
Eulogios, 20th year
Anastasios 5th year
In this year, the Chagan having marshaled his forces  marched to
Dalmatia and having taken Balkes and the forty cities round it 
destroyed them all. When Priscus learned of these events he sent 
Goudoues to spy on what was happening. After reaching the 
barbarians by travelling across difficult terrain he came upon two 
barbarians stupefied by wine. Goudoues questioned them about the 
movements of the barbarians. They said that the Chagan had handed 
over the captives to 2,000 hoplites to take home. Having learned this, 
Goudoues hid in a small gully and at dawn suddenly came up behind 
them and destroyed them all. Having got the captives he took
278		them to Priscus. The Chagan having learned of this disaster returned to 
his own territory and Priscus went back to his.

4
02

AM 6092 (AD 599/600)
Year of the divine Incarnation 592.
Maurice, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 18th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (39 years), 12th year 
Kyriakos, bishop of Constantinople (11 years), 6th year 
Amos, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 8th year
Eulogios, bishop of Alexandria (27 years), 21st year 
Anastasios, bishop of Antioch (6 years), 6th year
In this year, in the month of March of the 3rd indiction, Priscus, taking his 
forces, moved to Singidunum. The Chagan, having gathered together his own 
force, suddenly invaded Mysia and tried to capture the city of Tomis. For this 
reason Priscus left Singidunum and moved close to him. When the festival of 
Easter arrived and the Romans were wasting away with hunger, the Chagan, 
having heard about this, told Priscus to send wagons to him so that he might 
send the Romans provisions for them to celebrate their own festival with joy. 
And so he filled and sent them 400 wagons. Similarly Priscus sent in return 
various Indian goods to the barbarians, namely pepper, Indian cloves, costus 
spice, cinnamon, and other rare goods, while the Chagan was based at 
Sermium. He was delighted with the goods he received. Until the completion 
of the festival the Romans and the barbarians camped side by side without any 
fear in either army. When the celebration was over the barbarians separated 
from the Romans.
  Maurice, supposedly to help Priscus, sent out Komentiolos with an infantry 
force. Having learned this, the Chagan marched into Mysia against 
Komentiolos to about thirty miles from him. Komentiolos secretly sent a 
messenger to the Chagan.  Some say that Maurice instructed Komentiolos to 
betray the Roman army to the enemy because of their indiscipline.  In the 
middle of the night, 279 he ordered the army to arm, but did not disclose to 
the troops that they were about to engage in battle. They, supposing that he had 
ordered them to carry arms for the sake of an exercise, did not arm themselves 
properly. When day came and the barbarians arrived, there was a great uproar in 
the army.  Komentiolos disturbed the ranks and was himself the cause of their 
disorder. Thereupon the Romans turned and fled while the barbarians, finding 
the troops out of control, slaughtered them without mercy.  Komentiolos 
reached Drizipera in a disgraceful flight, but the citizens hurled insults and 
stones at him and drove him from the city. The barbarians, having come to 
Drizipera, destroyed the city and burned the church of St Alexander. Having 
found that his tomb was plated with silver,
403

they stripped it in unholy fashion and subjected the martyr's body to 
mockery. And having taken many captives in Thrace, they banqueted 
sumptuously and behaved arrogantly towards the Romans. When 
Komentiolos reached Byzantium, utter confusion and uproar descended 
on the city, so much so that the inhabitants out of fear wanted to 
abandon Europe and move across to Chalcedon in Asia. The emperor, 
taking the excubitors and having assembled an armed band, kept guard 
at the Long Walls. The people were guarding the city. The Senate 
advised the emperor to send a legation to the Chagan. God, to avenge 
the martyr Alexander, sent a pestilential plague on the barbarians and 
on a single day it killed from fever and swellings seven of the 
Chagan's sons along with many swarms of others, so that instead of 
the joy of victory and triumphal songs and hymns, the barbarian turned 
to dirges, tears, and inconsolable sorrow. The Senate exhorted the 
Caesar to send a legation to the Chagan. (The emperor sent Harmatzon 
with many gifts to the Chagan) at Drizipera, who soothed the 
barbarian with gentle words. But the barbarian was unwilling to accept 
the gifts as he was
280 filled with uncontrollable grief for his sons. He said to the envoy, 'God will 
judge between me and the emperor Maurice. For it was he who broke the 
peace. I shall give him back the prisoners if I am paid by him one 
nomisma per head.' But Maurice would not agree to pay. The Chagan 
asked again for half a nomisma per head. But the emperor refused to 
pay even this, or even four keratia. So the Chagan, in fury, killed them 
all and returned home, adding 50,000 gold pieces to the tribute paid by the 
Romans. And they agreed not to cross the river Ister. As a result of this 
much hatred was stirred up against the emperor Maurice and they began 
to hurl abuse at him. So also the army in Thrace was stirred to abuse the 
emperor. The army sent representatives to the emperor to accuse 
Komentiolos of treachery during the war. Among them was Phokas who, 
in addressing the emperor at the silentium, spoke against him so 
forcefully that one of the patricians boxed his ears and pulled his 
beard. The emperor rejected the (army's) accusation against 
Komentiolos, and dismissed them empty handed. For this reason the 
plot against the emperor was started.
  About this time in the river Nile in Egypt, while the prefect Menas 
was journeying with a host of people in the region known as the 
Delta, as the sun was rising, creatures of human form appeared in the 
river, a man and a woman. The man was broad chested and striking in 
appearance, with fair grizzled hair, and he was naked to his loins and 
revealed his nakedness to all. The water covered the remaining parts 
of his body. The prefect entreated him
404


by oaths not to dispel the vision before everybody had had their fill of 
this incredible sight. The woman had a smooth face and breasts
and long hair. All the people gazed in amazement at these creatures	281
until the ninth hour, when they sank into the river. Menas wrote to the 
emperor Maurice about this.


AM 6093 [AD 600/1]
Year of the divine Incarnation 5 93
Maurice, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 19th year Chosroes, 
emperor of the Persians (39 years), 13th year Kyriakos, bishop of 
Constantinople (11 years), 7th year Isaac, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years), 
1st year
Eulogios, bishop of Alexandria (27 years), 22nd year Anastasios, bishop of 
Antioch (9 years), 1st year
In this year on 26 March, of the 4th indiction, on holy Easter day,  the Augusta 
Sophia the wife of Justin, together with Constantina, the wife of Maurice, made a 
precious crown which they offered to the emperor. After gazing at it, the emperor 
went to the church,
406

offered it to God, and hung it above the holy table by a triple chain of gold and 
precious stones. The Augustas were greatly grieved when they learned this and the 
Augusta Constantina celebrated Easter in conflict with the emperor.
  The emperor disregarded the accusations against Komentiolos made by the 
armies in Thrace and it was Komentiolos himself who, taking the army, went to 
the Ister and joined forces with Priscus at Singidunum. The peace with the Avars 
was dissolved, and now that it was broken, they went to Viminakion, which is a 
large island in the Ister. When the Chagan heard of this, he assembled his own 
forces and advanced towards Roman territory. He delivered other forces to his 
four sons and stationed them to guard the crossings of the Ister. The Romans 
built rafts, crossed the river, and joined battle with the sons of the Chagan, with 
Priscus in command. For Komentiolos was ill and stayed on the island of 
Viminakion. The battle lasted many hours and when the sun set 300 Romans had 
been killed as against   282 4,000 barbarians. Having drawn up the armies again 
at dawn, they again began fighting and destroyed 8,000 of the barbarians. 
Likewise on the third day the Romans, drawn up on higher ground, moved 
against the barbarians and, after routing them and driving the Avars into the 
waters of the marsh, drowned many of them. Amongst these the Chagan's sons 
were drowned. The Romans won a conspicuous victory.
  The Chagan, having gathered numerous forces, advanced against the Romans. 
After they had joined battle, the Romans routed the barbarians and gained a 
victory more remarkable than all others. Priscus, having drawn up a force of 
4,000, ordered them to cross the river Tissos and to spy out the movements of 
the barbarians. The barbarians, knowing nothing of what had happened, were 
carousing together in celebrating a festival. The Romans, falling upon them by 
stealth, carried out a great massacre, for they killed 30,000 Gepids and other 
barbarians. After taking many captives they returned to Priscus. The Chagan 
having again gathered his forces, went to the Ister. And having clashed in battle, 
the barbarians were defeated and drowned in the currents of the river. Many 
Sklavini perished with them. The Romans captured alive 3,000 Avars, (800 
Sklavini, and 3), 200 (Gepids), and 2,000 [other] barbarians. The Chagan sent 
envoys to the emperor Maurice to try to get back the prisoners. But Maurice, 
who had not yet learned of the Romans' conspicuous victory, wrote to Priscus to 
give back to the Chagan only the Avars. Komentiolos, who had scarcely 
recovered from his illness, went out to Novae in search of guides who might 
lead him to the route taken by the emperor Trajan. An old man who knew it 
claimed that it was
407


283 difficult and had not been passable for many years, especially in winter as it 
went over high mountains and was covered with snow. Komentiolos, not 
convinced by the old man's words, set out along this route. But because of 
the terrible cold and severe frosts, many of the Romans and most of the 
pack animals perished. He barely made it to Philippoupolis. With the 
Romans wintering there, Komentiolos came to Byzantium.
  In the same year a man wearing monastic habit and eminent for his austere 
life, unsheathed a sword and ran, sword in hand, from the Forum to the 
Chalke, proclaiming to all that the emperor would die, murdered by a 
dagger. Similarly Herodianos predicted openly to Maurice what would 
happen to him. The emperor went bare­ foot on a litany at night with the 
whole city, and when he was going by the quarter of Karpianos, some of the 
crowd became disorderly and threw stones at the emperor who was barely 
saved with his son Theodosios and completed the prayer at Blachernai. 
The people found a man of similar appearance to Maurice and put a black 
cloak on him, wove him a crown of garlic, set him on an ass, and mocked 
him saying, 'He has found a gentle heifer, and, like the young cock, has 
leaped on her and made children like hard seeds, and no one dares to 
speak but he has muzzled everyone. Oh my Lord, terrible and powerful, 
strike him on the skull to make him less arrogant. And I shall vow to you 
this great ox in thanksgiving.' The emperor caught and punished many of 
these. 

408



Year of the divine Incarnation 594
Maurice, emperor of the Romans (20 years), 20th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians ( 39 years), 14th year 
Kyriakos, bishop of Constantinople (11 years), 8th year 
Isaac, bishop of Jerusalem (8 years) 2nd year
Eulogios, bishop of Alexandria (27 years), 23rd year 
Anastasios, bishop of Antioch (9 years), 2nd year

In this year, in the month of November, indiction 5 the emperor Maurice joined in 
marriage his son Theodosios to the daughter of the patrician Germanus.   They 284 
were crowned by Kyriakos, the patriarch of Constantinople. On 11 January, 
Dometianus, bishop of Melitene and a relative of the emperor, died and was buried in 
the church of the Holy Apostles by the patriarch Kyriakos and honoured with funeral 
rites by the whole Senate. The emperor reappointed and sent out his brother Peter as 
general of Thrace. For he had heard that the hordes of the barbarians,

409
with Apsech as general, had congregated round the Cataracts. Peter sent an 
envoy to Apsech to discuss peace, but Apsech attempted to capture the 
Cataracts from the Romans. The Chagan marched on Constantiola. The 
Romans returned to Thrace and came to Adrianople. The emperor, having 
learned that the Chagan was moving against Byzantium, wrote to Peter to 
return to the Ister and sent Bonosos, the skribon, with ships to transport the 
troops across the river. Peter, having sent out his second in command Goudoues 
across the Ister, took many captives. Having learned this, the Chagan sent 
out Apsech with a host to destroy the tribe of the Antai for their support of 
the Romans. When this happened, a portion of the barbarians went over to the 
Romans.
  Maurice, who had been reflecting inwardly and knew that nothing escapes 
the notice of God, but that He requites everyone according to his deeds, and 
having considered his wrongdoing in not having ransomed the captives, 
judged that it was better to atone for his sin in this life rather than in the next; 
and having made supplications in writing, sent them to all the patriarchal 
thrones and to all communities subject to him, and to the monasteries, both 
those in the desert and in Jerusalem, and to the lavras, with gifts of money 
and candles and incense, so that they would pray for him 285   so that he  
might make atonement here and not in the time that is to come. He was even 
offended with Philippikos, his brother in law, because his name began with 
the letter Phi. But Philippikos swore in various ways that his fealty to 
Maurice was untainted and that he had not plotted against him. While 
Maurice was beseeching God to have mercy on his soul, one night, as he 
slept, he had a vision that he was standing at the Bronze Gate of the palace by 
the image of the Saviour and a (very great) crowd was beside him. And a 
voice came from the portrait of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ, 
saying, 'Bring forward Maurice.' And the ministers of justice took hold of 
him and placed him on the purple disc that is there. And the divine voice said 
to him, 'Where do you wish that I requite you? Here or in the world to 
come?' To these words he replied, 'Merciful Lord and righteous judge, here 
preferably and not in the world to come.' And the divine voice ordered that 
Maurice and his wife (Constantina) and their children and all their kinsmen 
be given over to the soldier Phokas. So Maurice woke up and having called his 
parakoimomenos,  sent him to his brother in law Philippikos with orders to 
bring him to the emperor with all speed. The parakoimomenos departed and 
summoned him. Philippikos, on rising, summoned his wife and embraced her, 
saying 'Farewell, you will not see me again.' She cried out in a loud voice 
with lamentations
410

and said to the parakoimomenos, 'I beseech you, by God, what is the matter 
that he wants him at this hour?' The parakoimomenos swore that he did not 
know and said, 'The emperor suddenly awoke from his sleep and dispatched 
me.' Philippikos asked to receive communion and after this went to the 
emperor. His wife Gordia lay on the ground crying, weeping, and praying to 
God. On entering the imperial bedchamber, Philippikos threw himself at the 
emperor's feet. The emperor said to him, 'Forgive me for the sake of God for the 
wrong I did you. For until now I have been angry with you.' And after ordering 
the parakoimomenos to leave, he stood up and fell at Philippikos' feet, saying, 
'Forgive me, for I know for certain that you did no wrong to 286   me. But tell 
me, do you know your tagmata a certain soldier named Phokas?' After 
reflecting, Philippikos replied, 'I do know one who was sent a little while ago as a 
representative of the army and who spoke against your authority.' The emperor 
asked, 'Of what character is he?' Philippikos replied, 'Rebellious, insolent, and 
cowardly.' Then Maurice said, 'If he is a coward, then he is also a murderer.' And 
he explained to Philippikos the revelation of the dream. On that night there 
appeared in the heavens a star which is called a comet. On the following day 
there returned the magistrianus who had been sent to the holy fathers in the 
desert, bearing their reply which was that, 'God, having accepted your 
repentance, saves your soul and enrolls you and your whole family among the 
saints, but you will be driven from your throne in disgrace and danger.' When he 
heard this, Maurice glorified God greatly.
  Accordingly, when the season of autumn arrived, and the emperor Maurice 
had ordered Peter to make the army winter in the territory of the Sklavini, the 
Romans objected and refused to do it because of the exhaustion of their horses, 
the great amount of booty that they were holding, and the mass of barbarians 
scattered about the countryside, and so they plotted a rebellion. The general, 
furiously indignant with the army, drove them to folly. Then heavy rain fell on 
the army and it was bitterly cold. Peter stayed about twenty miles from the 
army. Maurice disturbed Peter by writing with orders to cross the Ister and to 
obtain the winter supplies for the army from the land of the Sklavini, so that 
he would not be forced to provide public food supplies for the Romans. The 
general summoned Goudoues and said, 'The emperor's orders that the Romans 
should winter in foreign territory are excessively difficult for me. For it is 
wrong to disobey and worse to obey. Avarice gives
birth to nothing good, but is the mother of all evils. Since the 287
emperor is sick with avarice, he is the cause of the greatest evils to the 
Romans.' Having summoned the commanders of the army, he

411


revealed to them the emperor's will. They said that the troops would not 
accept this. When the troops heard about it, they rebelled. The higher 
officers fled from them and came to the general. The troops congregated 
and put up the centurion Phokas as their leader, and having raised him 
on a shield, they acclaimed him as leader. When Peter heard this, he 
turned to flight and revealed the whole story to the emperor.
  When the emperor heard the bad news, he tried to keep it secret from 
the people. On the next day he even held the chariot races, keeping the news 
of the disaster secret. But the partisans of the Greens shouted out, 
'Constantine and Domentziolos, 0 thrice august master of the Romans, are 
vexing your own colour so that Kroukes may become our manager,3 for the 
sins we have committed. But God, the creator of everything, will subject 
to you without bloodshed every opponent and enemy both at home and 
abroad.' The emperor then declared to the partisans, 'The unruliness and 
indiscipline of stupid soldiers should not disturb you at all.' The Blues then 
said, 'God, who commanded you to be emperor, will subject to you all 
who fight against your realm. If there is a Roman who is ungrateful to you, 
God will subject him to your service without bloodshed. Then the 
emperor, having armed them and calmed them with soothing words, 
ordered them to guard the city walls with the demarchs. While the 
emperor's son (Theodosios), together with his father in law Germanus, 
was hunting at Kallikrateia, the Romans sent a letter to Theodosios asking 
to have him as their emperor; otherwise, they would proclaim even 
Germanus as emperor. For they would no longer put up with being ruled 
by Maurice.
  When Maurice heard of this, he summoned his son to him and 
ordered Komentiolos to guard the walls. He accused Germanus along 
with his son Theodosios of being the cause of their misfortunes
288 As Germanus made his defence, Maurice said, 'Germanus, there are two 
proofs of my suspicion: the letter from the army to you and the fact that 
the army has spared the herd of horses that grazes on your estates. For 
they have plundered everything else but spared yours. Do not bother to 
make a long speech, Germanus, for nothing is sweeter than to die by 
the sword' Germanus sought refuge in the church of the Mother of God 
in the quarter of Kyros. When the emperor learned this, he dispatched 
the eunuch Stephen to remove Germanus from the church. Since 
Stephen was intending to use force in taking him out, Germanus' 
bodyguard opposed Stephen and then drove him off, took Germanus, 
and fled to the Great Church. The emperor flogged his son Theodosios 
with rods. For he claimed that it was because of him that Germanus had 
escaped. He
412

sent the excubitors to remove Germanus from the Great Church. At this great 
uproar fell upon the city. Germanus was willing to come out and to 
surrender himself. But the people would not accept this and abused the 
emperor with heavy insults, saying, 'May the one who loves you be 
stripped of his skin, Maurice, you Marcianite.' Next those who were 
guarding the walls, when they learned of this, neglected their watch. Then 
the Green faction set fire to the house of Constantine surnamed Lardos.
   In the middle of the night Maurice took off his imperial robes, put on 
civilian dress, boarded a dromon with his wife, children, and Constantine 
and fled. The masses continued to abuse the emperor with the vilest insults 
throughout the whole night and even mocked the patriarch Kyriakos. After 
a great storm had blown up Maurice, after very great danger, reached 
safety at St Autonomos. During the same night he was attacked by arthritic 
disease,   known as foot gout and hand gout. From there he sent his son 
Theodosios with
Constantine to Chosroes, emperor of the Persians, to remind him of 289
what he had obtained from Maurice so that he might repay the good deed 
to his son.
  Germanus made overtures to Sergius, demarch of the Green faction, to 
enlist his support to make him emperor, promising to honour the Green 
faction and to grant him great honours. Sergius commended this to the 
leaders of the colour. They rejected it saying, 'Germanus would never break 
from his support for the Blues.'
  The Greens, having gone out to Rhegion, honoured the usurper Phokas 
with great acclamation and persuaded him to come to the Hebdomon. 
Accordingly Phokas sent Theodore the a secretis, who went to the Great 
Church and read [a proclamation] to the people that the patriarch, the 
demes, and the Senate should come to the Hebdomon. When this had taken 
place and everyone had arrived at the Hebdomon, the patriarch Kyriakos 
demanded an assurance from the usurper regarding the orthodox faith and 
that he would guard the Church without disturbance. The usurper appeared 
to encourage Germanus to be emperor. But when Germanus pretended that 
he was unwilling and the factions acclaimed the usurper, the evil was 
proclaimed and the usurper was elected as lord of the scepters, disaster 
overcame prosperity and the great misfortunes of the Romans began. The 
proclamation of the usurper took place in the church of John the Baptist. 
After tarrying there for two days, he entered the palace on the third, seated 
in the imperial carriage. On the fifth day he crowned his wife Leontia as 
Augusta. That day the factions were at strife with each other over the 
positions of their precincts. The usurper sent out his fellow rebel, Alexander, 
to
calm the factions. Alexander came to blows with Kosmas, demarch of the 
Blues, whom he shoved and insulted. The Blues out of annoyance began 
chanting 'Go away and learn the protocol Maurice is not dead.'
  When the usurper heard this, he made ready to murder Maurice. Having 
sent out some soldiers he brought [Maurice and
290	his family] to the harbour of Eutropios at Chalcedon. The fives male children 
of the emperor were put to death first before his eyes, so punishing the 
emperor in advance with the slaughter of his children. Maurice, reflecting 
wisely on this calamity, kept on invoking the God of all and frequently 
repeated, 'Righteous art thou 0 Lord, and upright are thy judgments.' The 
death of the children in fact provided the epitaph for the father who showed 
an example of bravery in the face of enormous misfortune. For when a nurse 
concealed one of the imperial infants and offered her own for slaughter, 
Maurice did not allow it but sought out his own. It is said that, when this 
child was slaughtered, milk flowed with the blood so that all who witnessed 
it lamented bitterly. So the emperor, proving superior to the laws of nature, 
exchanged his present life.
  From that moment calamities that were both manifold and extraordinary 
did not cease in the empire of the Romans. For Chosroes, the emperor of the 
Persians, broke the peace, the Avars devastated Thrace, and both of the 
Roman armies were destroyed to such an extent that when Herakleios 
became emperor and made an accurate review of the army, out of the whole 
mass who had been present with Phokas at the time of the uprising against 
Maurice, he could find no more than two men. To such a degree were those 
who established the usurper destroyed in his time.


415-417




Year of the divine Incarnation 5 9 5
Phokas, emperor of the Romans (7 years), 1st year Chosroes, 
emperor of the Persians (39 years), 15th year Kyriakos, bishop of 
Constantinople (11 years), 9th year Isaac, bishop of Jerusalem (8 
years), 3rd year
Eulogios, bishop of Alexandria (27 years), 24th year Anastasios, 
bishop of Antioch (9 years), 3rd year
In this year, in the month of November, indiction 6,  the usurper 291 Phokas, 
upon his accession, slew Maurice together with his five male children as 
already indicated. He directed that their heads should be placed for several 
days in the Campus of the Tribunal; and the inhabitants of the City would 
go forth and view them until they began to smell. Peter, Maurice's brother, 
and many others
418

were also slain. As for Maurice's son Theodosios, a rumour prevails 
that he escaped and was saved. This rumour was fanned by 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians, who on different occasions 
uttered different lies, alleging that he had Theodosios with him and 
was making provision that he should take possession of the Empire 
of the Romans; whereas he was himself hoping to gain control of the 
Roman Empire by deceit, whereof he was convicted in many ways, 
especially by starting sudden wars and inflicting great damage on the 
Roman lands. When Phokas had sent to him the ambassador Bilios, 
Chosroes arrested this man and threw him in prison so he could not 
return to Roman territory, and gave answer to Phokas by means of 
insulting letters. As for the empress Constantina, the usurper confined 
her, together with her three daughters, in a private house known as 
that of Leo.
  In the city of Alexandria a certain calligrapher, who was a pious 
man, was returning home from a vigil, it was the middle of the night, 
when he saw the statues, toppled from their pedestals, proclaiming 
in a loud voice that Maurice and his children had been killed and all 
the other calamities that had happened at Byzantium. In the morning 
the man went to the augustalis and reported these matters to him. 
The latter enjoined upon him not to reveal them to anyone and, 
having noted the day, waited for the outcome. On the ninth day a 
messenger arrived announcing the slaying of Maurice. Thereupon the 
augustalis made public before the people the prediction of the demons.
  Now Narses, who was a Roman general, rose up against the usurper and 
seized Edessa. Thereupon Phokas wrote to the general Germanus to lay siege 
to Edessa; while Narses wrote to Chosroes, emperor of the Persians, to 
collect his forces and make war on the	 
292 Romans. Phokas made his own brother Domentziolos magister and Priscus 
comes excubitorum.





Phokas, 2nd year Chosroes, 
16th year Kyriakos, 10st 
year Isaac, 4th year 
Eulogios, 25th year 
Anastasios, 4th year
In the month of December of this year, indiction 7,  Phokas went in 
procession during the feast days and distributed much largess. And 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians, collected a great force and sent it against 
the Romans. When Germanus had heard of this, he took fright, but was 
compelled to start war. Germanus was wounded in battle and his bodyguard 
escorted him to Constantina; and the Romans were defeated. And on the 
eleventh day Germanus died. As for Phokas, he conveyed the armies from 
Europe to Asia after increasing the tribute to the Chagan in the belief that 
the Avar nation was at rest. Dividing the armies, he sent (one part) against 
the Persians and the other part to besiege Edessa, that is against Narses, 
under the command of the eunuch Leontios, who was one of his magnates. 
And Chosroes collected his forces and marched on Daras, while Narses 
departed from Edessa and took refuge at Hierapolis. Chosroes met the 
Romans at Arxamoun and, setting his elephants in a fort like formation, went 
into battle and won a great victory. He captured many of the Romans and 
beheaded them. When these things had been done, Chosroes returned to his 
own land entrusting his forces to Zongoes. When Phokas had heard of this, 
he was angered at Leontios and brought him ignominiously to Byzantium in 
iron fetters; and he appointed Domentziolos, his own nephew, to be 
commander in chief and gave him the rank of curopalates.

420



Phokas, 3rd year 
Chosroes, 17th year 
Kyriakos, 11th year 
Isaac, 5th year 
Eulogios, 26th year 
Anastasios, 5th year
In this year Chosroes sent out Kardarigas and Rousmiazan  and they 
captured many Roman cities. Domentziolos for his part gave a promise 
to Narses and persuaded him by means of many oaths that
he would suffer no harm at the hands of Phokas, and so sent him to   293 
Phokas, who, not keeping the promise, burnt him in a fire. The Romans were 
much distressed since Narses inspired great fear among the Persians, so much 
so that Persian children trembled when they heard the name of Narses. (The 
Persians, on the other hand, were filled with great joy.)

[AM 6098, AD 605/6)
Phokas, 4th year 
Chosroes, 18th year
Thomas, bishop of Constantinople (3 years), 1st year Isaac, 
6th year
Eulogios, 27th year 
Anastasios, 6th year
In this year the eunuch Scholastikos,  a titled man from the palace, in the 
middle of the night took the empress Constantina and her
42
1


three daughters and sought asylum in the Great Church at the 
instigation of the patrician Germanus, who was reaching after the 
imperial office. As a result, there was great disturbance in the City. 
The Greens gathered at the kochlias and reviled Constantina, while 
Germanus sent a talent of gold to the demarch of the Greens that he 
might cooperate with his party; but the leading men of the deme did not 
consent to this. The usurper sent men to the church to remove the 
women, but the patriarch Kyriakos opposed him because he did not 
consent that the women should be removed from the church by force. 
Only when he had been assured by Phokas under oath that the latter 
would not harm them, were they brought out of the holy church and 
confined to a monastery. As for Germanus, Phokas had him tonsured 
and ordained a priest; and he kept him under guard in his own house. 
At that time Philippikos, too, cut off his hair and took holy orders 
and dwelt at the monastery at Chrysopolis which he had built.
  In this year the Persians captured Daras and all of Mesopotamia 
and Syria, taking an innumerable multitude of captives.
  On the death of the patriarch Kyriakos, Thomas was ordained in 
his stead on 11 October. He had been deacon and sakellarios of the 
same church.


94	AM 6099 (AD 
606/7)
Year of the divine Incarnation 599
Phokas, emperor of the Romans (7 years), 5th year
422

Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (39 years), 19th year Thomas, 
bishop of Constantinople (3 years), 2nd year Isaac, bishop of 
Jerusalem (8 years), 7th year      Theodore, bishop of 
Alexandria (2 years), 1st year Anastasios, bishop of Antioch (9 
years), 7th year
   In this year the usurper Phokas gave his daughter Domentzia in 
marriage to the patrician Priscus, who was comes excubitorum, and, 
while the wedding was being celebrated in the palace of Marina, he 
commanded that chariot races be held. The demarchs of the two 
factions set up in the tetrakiones  the laurata of Priscus and Domentzia 
along with the imperial ones. When the emperor saw them, he was 
vexed and summoned the demarchs Theophanes and Pamphilos and, 
making them stand naked at the stama, he ordered that they should be 
beheaded. Sending his chief messenger, he asked them by whose order 
they had done such a thing. They replied that the decorators had done it 
according to custom. Now the demes and the crowd shouted, 'Long live 
our merciful emperor!' When the decorators were asked why they had 
done such a thing, they said, 'We did this on our own because everyone 
called them the emperor's children.' As for Priscus, he was seized by terror, 
fearing as he did the emperor's irritation. The crowds went on shouting 
that those men should be treated mercifully and Phokas forgave them. 
From that time on, therefore, Priscus harbored anger and did not deal 
honestly with Phokas.
  A certain woman called Petronia served the empress Constantina in 
conveying messages to Germanus. As the rumour spread about that 
Theodosios, the son of Maurice, was alive, both Constantina and 
Germanus had high hopes on that account. But the foul Petronia revealed 
these matters to the usurper and he delivered Constantina to the prefect 
Theopemptos to be subjected to torture; and as she 295   was being 
tortured, she confessed that the patrician Romanus was privy to their 
conversations. When this man had been arrested (and interrogated), he 
admitted that he had other accomplices in the plot against the usurper. 
Also arrested was Theodore, prefect of the East, whom the usurper 
killed by flogging. He cut off the hands and feet of Elpidios and then 
threw him in the fire; he beheaded Romanus and put to the sword 
Constantina with her three daughters at the jetty of Eutropios, where 
Maurice, too, had been slain; and he killed by the sword Germanus 
and the latter's daughter on the island of Prate, and likewise John and 
Tzitas and Patricius and Theodosios, who held the rank of subadiuva, 
and Andrew Skombros and David, who was chartophylax of the 
palace of Hormisdas.
423


  In the same year the Persians crossed the Euphrates and captured all 
of Syria, Palestine, and Phoenicia, wreaking great devastation among the 
Roma ns



AM 6IOO [AD 607/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 600
Phokas, emperor of the Romans (7 years), 6th year Chosroes, 
emperor of the Persians ( 39 years), 20th year Thomas, bishop of 
Constantinople ( 3 years), 3rd year Isaac, bishop of Jerusalem ( 8 
years), 8th year
Theodore, bishop of Alexandria (2 years), 2nd year 
Anastasios, bishop of Antioch (9 years), 8th year
   In this year Priscus, who could not suffer to witness the unjust 
murders and other evils that were being perpetrated by Phokas, wrote 
to the patrician Herakleios, who was strategos of Africa, that he 
should send his son Herakleios and Niketas, the son of the patrician 
Gregoras, his second in command, with a view to their 296   
attacking the usurper Phokas; for he had heard that a revolt was being 
planned against Phokas in Africa. For this reason the African ships did 
not set sail during this year.
  Phokas slew all the relatives of Maurice and Komentiolos, strategos 
of Thrace, and many others without pity. In the same year there 
occurred a plague and a shortage of all commodities.


  The Persians marched out under the command of Kardarigas and 
occupied Armenia and Cappadocia and defeated the Roma n armies in 
battle. They took Galatia and Paphlagonia and advanced as far as 
Chalcedon, killing indiscriminately people of every age. And while the 
Persians were oppressing the Romans outside the City, Phokas was 
committing worse crimes inside by murdering and imprisoning people.




AM 6101 (AD 608/9)
Year of the divine Incarnation 601 Phokas, 
7th year
Chosroes, 21st year
Sergios, bishop of Constantinople (29 years), 1st year  
Zacharias, bishop of Jerusalem (22 years), 1st year John, 
bishop of Alexandria (10 years), 1st year Anastasios, 9th 
year
In this year the Jews of Antioch, becoming disorderly, staged an uprising 
against the Christians and murdered Anastasios, the great patriarch of 
Antioch, whose genitals they put in his mouth. After this, they dragged 
him along the main street and they killed many landowners and burnt 
them. Phokas appointed Bonosos comes Orientis and Kottanas military 
commander and sent them against

the Jews, (but they were unable to stop the uprising). So they 
gathered troops and attacked them, and many of them they killed 
and maimed and banished from the city.
  Phokas held chariot races and the Greens reviled him, saying, 
'Once again you have drunk from the cup! Once again you have 
lost your mind!' On orders from Phokas, Kosmas the prefect of the 
City maimed many persons and hung their limbs in the Sphendone, 
while
297.	297	others he beheaded and others he put in sacks and 
drowned in the sea. The Greens gathered together and set fire to 
the Praetorium and burnt the secretum, the bureau, and the prison; 
and the prisoners escaped. Phokas was angered and ordered that the 
Greens should be barred from holding public office.
  Herakleios, strategos of Africa, being pressed by the Senate, 
equipped his son Herakleios so as to send him against the usurper 
Phokas. Likewise, his second in command, Gregoras, sent by land 
his son Niketas, and they agreed that the one who would come first 
and vanquish the usurper would become emperor.
  In the same year there was very severe cold so that the sea froze 
and, in these conditions, many fish were cast out.
  At this time Phokas ordered that Makrobios the skribon should be shot 
with arrows at the encampment and left to die hanging from a spear, the 
kind used by recruits in their training, at the castle of the 
Theodosiani in the Hebdomon; and this because he had been privy to 
the conspiracy against him. For the prefect Theodore the 
Cappadocian and Elpidios, head of the arms stores, as well as others had 
made a plan to kill Phokas at the hippodrome games. Theodore, the 
praetorian prefect, gave a luncheon at which he began to explain his 
purpose to them. It happened that Anastasios, the comes largitionum, 
was present. As lunch was being served and Theodore was explaining 
the details of the conspiracy, Anastasios (who was there) changed his 
mind and did not express his private thoughts, but remained silent. 
As for Elpidios, he insisted, saying, 'Don't you want me to seize him 
when he is sitting on his throne at the hippodrome games and gouge out 
his eyes and kill him in this manner?' And he promised to give them 
arms. When the matter became known to Phokas through the 
denunciation of Anastasios, he ordered that the prefect and Elpidios and 
the other dignitaries who had knowledge of the conspiracy should be 
interrogated with the utmost thoroughness
298      When they had been interrogated, they confessed the particulars 
of the conspiracy and that they were intending to make Theodore 
emperor. Phokas ordered that Theodore, Elpidios, Anastasios, and 
all the others who had knowledge of the conspiracy should be 
beheaded.8


AM 6102 [AD 609/10)
Year of the divine Incarnation 602
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 1st year Chosroes, 
emperor of the Persians (39 years), 22nd year Sergius, bishop of 
Constantinople (29 years), 2nd year Zacharias, bishop of Jerusalem 
(22 years) 2nd year John, bishop of Alexandria (10 years), 2nd 
year
In this year, on 4 October, a Monday, indiction 14, Herakleios arrived from 
Africa bringing fortified ships that had on their masts reliquaries and 
icons of the Mother of God (as George the Pisidian relates) as well as a 
numerous army from Africa and Mauritania; and likewise Niketas, the 
son of the patrician Gregoras, came from Alexandria and the Pentapolis 
having with him a big host of infantry. Now, Herakleios had been 
betrothed to Eudokia, daughter
427


of the African Rogas, who at that time was at Constantinople together 
with Epiphaneia, the mother of Herakleios. (And when Phokas heard 
that the mother of Herakleios was in the City) as well as his fiancée 
Eudokia, he apprehended them and confined them in the imperial 
monastery called the New Repentance. 
  I.	I	When Herakleios had reached Abydos, he found 
Theodore, comes of Abydos, whom he interrogated and learnt what 
was happening at Constantinople. Phokas, for his part, dispatched his 
brother, the magister Domentziolos, to guard the Long Walls; and 
when the magister learnt that Herakleios had reached Abydos, he
299 abandoned the walls and fled to Constantinople. As for Herakleios, he 
received at Abydos all (the dignitaries who had been exiled) by 
Phokas and came with them to Herakleia. And Stephen, metropolitan 
of Kyzikos, took a crown from the church of the holy Mother of God 
of Artake and brought it to Herakleios. And when he reached 
Constantinople, he put in at the harbour of Sophia; and after giving 
battle, he defeated the usurper Phokas by the grace of Christ. The 
demes seized the latter, killed him, and burnt him at the [Forum] 
Bovis. Herakleios entered the palace and was crowned by the patriarch 
Sergius in the chapel of St Stephen, which is in the palace. On the 
same day his fiancée Eudokia was crowned Augusta and both of them 
received the nuptial crowns from the patriarch Sergius, so that on the 
same day he became emperor and bridegroom.
  I n the month of May the Persia ns marched into Syria and they took 
Apameia and Edessa and came as far as Antioch. The Roma ns met 
them and gave battle and were defeated; and the entire Roma n host 
perished so that very few escaped.
  On 7 July of the same indiction a daughter, Epiphaneia, was born to 
the emperor by Eudokia, and on 15 August she was baptized at 
Blachernai by the patriarch Sergios.


AM 6I03 [AD 6rn/n]
Year of the divine Incarnation 603
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 2nd year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (39 years), 23rd year Sergius, 
bishop of Constantinople (29 years), 3rd year Zacharias, bishop 
of Jerusalem (22 years), 3rd year
John, bishop of Alexandria (10 years), 3rd year
In this year the Persia ns captured Caesarea in Cappadocia and took therein 
many tens of thousands of captives.
  The emperor Herakleios found the affairs of the Roman state undone, for 
the Avars had devastated Europe, while the Persians had 300 destroyed all of 
Asia and had captured the cities and annihilated in
battle the Roman army. On seeing these things he was at a loss what to 
do. He made a census of the army to find out if there were any 
survivors from among those who had revolted with Phokas against 
Maurice and found only two in all the themata.
  On 3 May of the same year, indiction 15, a son was born to the 
emperor by Eudokia, namely the younger Herakleios, also called the 
new Constantine. And on 14 August of the same 15th indiction the 
Augusta Eudokia died.





(AM 6104, AD 6n/12)
Herakleios, 3rd year 
Chosroes, 24th year 
Sergius, 4th year 
Zacharias, 4th year John, 
4th year
   In this year, on 4 October, indiction 1, Epiphaneia, daughter of 
Herakleios, was crowned Augusta by the patriarch Sergius in the chapel 
of St Stephen in the palace. On 25 December of the same 1st indiction the 
young Herakleios, also called Constantine, son of Herakleios, was 
crowned by the patriarch Sergius.
  In the same year the Saracens invaded Syria and, after devastating several 
villages, returned home.



(AM 6105, AD 612/13]
Herakleios, 4th year 
Chosroes, 25th year 
Sergius, 5th year 
Zacharias, 5th year John, 
5th year
In this yea r the Persia ns occupied Damascus and took a multitude of captives.
  The emperor Herakleios sent ambassadors to Chosroes urging him to cease 
shedding pitilessly the blood of men, to appoint levies, and receive tribute. 
But the latter dismissed the ambassadors empty handed, without having 
spoken to them, for he hoped to seize the Roman state in its entirety. 
  In the same year Herakleios married Martina, whom he proclaimed 
Augusta and crowned in the Augustaion. The coronation was performed 
by the patriarch Sergius.

430


(AM 6106, AD 613/14)
Herakleios, 5th 
year Chosroes, 26th 
year Sergius, 6th 
year Zacharias, 6th 
year John, 6th year
In this year the Persians took [the region of] the Jordan, Palestine, 
and the Holy City by force of arms and killed many people therein
through the agency of the Jews: some say it was 90,000. For the Jews 
301
bought the Christians, each man according to his means, and killed 
them. As for Zacharias, patriarch of Jerusalem, and the holy and life 
giving Cross, the Persians took them along with many captives and 
carried them off to Persia.
  In the same year a second son called Constantine was born to the 
emperor by Martina and was baptized in the Blachernai by the patriarch 
Sergius.
4
3
1

(AM 6107, AD 614/15)
Herakleios, 6th year 
Chosroes, 27th year Sergius, 
7th year Zacharias, 7th year 
John, 7th year
In this year the Persia ns occupied all of Egypt and Alexandria and Libya as 
far as Ethiopia and, after taking many captives and immense booty and 
money, returned home. They were unable to take Chalcedon, so they left a 
force to besiege it and withdrew.


(AM 6108, AD 615/16]
Herakleios, 7th year Chosroes, 28th year Sergius, 8th year Zacharias, 8th year 
John, 8th year








432
In this year the Persia ns marched on Chalcedon and took it by war. On 1 January of 
this year, indiction 5, the younger Constantine, also called Herakleios, the son of 
Herakleios, assumed the consulship; and he raised to the rank of Caesar his own 
brother, the little Constantine, who had been born to Herakleios and Martina.

[AM 6109, AD 616/617]
Herakleios, 8th year Chosroes, 
29th year
Sergius, 9th year Zacharias, 9th 
year John, 9th year
In this year Herakleios once again sent ambassadors to Persia to ask Chosroes for 
peace, but Chosroes dismissed them again with the words, 'I shall not spare you 
until you renounce the Crucified one, whom you call God, and worship the sun.'


[AM 6010, AD 617/18]
Herakleios, 9th year Chosroes, 
30th year Sergius, 10th year 
Zacharias, 10st year
John, 10st year
In this year the Avars invaded Thrace and Herakleios sent ambassadors to them 
asking for peace. When the Chagan had agreed to conclude peace, the emperor 
went outside the Long Wall with the full

433

imperial retinue and many costly gifts so as to meet the Chagan after 
receiving from him pledges that they would make a peace settlement 
with one another. But the barbarian, transgressing the agreements 
and oaths, suddenly attacked the emperor in a treacherous
302 manner. Discomfited by this unexpected event, the emperor took to 
flight and returned to the City. As for the barbarian, he captured the 
imperial baggage and retinue and as many men as he could take by 
surprise ( deceived as they were by the hope of peace) and returned 
home after devastating many villages of Thrace. 





Year of the divine Incarnation 611
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 10st year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (39 years), 31st year 
Sergius, bishop of Constantinople ( 29 years), 11th year 
Zacharias, bishop of Jerusalem (22 years), 11th year 
George, bishop of Alexandria (14 years), 1st year
In this year Herakleios sent ambassadors to the Chagan of the Avars 
to reproach him for the unlawful deeds he had done and urge him to 
make peace; for, intending to make an expedition against Persia, he 
wished to be at peace with the Chagan. Now the Chagan, out of 
respect for the emperor's friendly attitude, offered his regrets and 
promised to observe peace. After agreeing on the amount of the 
tribute, the ambassadors returned in peace.
In the same year the Persia ns took by war Ancyra in Galatia.

434



Herakleios,	1th 
year Chosroes, 
32nd year Sergius, 
12th year Zacharias, 
12th year George, 
2nd year
In this year Chosroes hardened his yoke on all men by way of 
bloodthirstiness and taxation; for, being puffed up by his victory, he 
was no longer able to keep the established order. Then Herakleios, 
becoming filled with divine zeal and, as he had thought, having 
made peace with the Avars, transferred the European armies to Asia 
and was planning to move against Persia with God's help.




Herakleios, 12th 
year Chosroes, 33rd 
year Sergius, 13th 
year Zacharias, 3th 
year George, 3rd 
year
In this year, on 4 April, indiction 10,  the emperor Herakleios, after 
celebrating the Easter feast, straight away set out against Persia on 
Monday evening. Being short of funds he took on loan the moneys
of religious establishments and he also took the candelabra and
	
303 other vessels of the holy ministry from the Great Church, which he 
minted into a great quantity of gold and silver coin. He left his own
son at Constantinople in the care of the patriarch Sergius to conduct the 
business of state along with the patrician Bonosos, a man of prudence, 
intelligence, and experience. He also wrote an exhortation to the 
Chagan of the Avars that the latter might assist the Roman state 
inasmuch as he had concluded a treaty of friendship with him, and he 
named the Chagan guardian of his son. Setting out from the Imperial 
City he went by ship to Pylai, as the place is called. From there he 
proceeded to the country of the themata, where he collected his 
armies and added new contingents to them. He began to train them 
and instruct them in military deeds. He divided the army into two and 
bade them draw up battle lines and attack each other without loss of 
blood; he taught them the battle cry, battle songs and
4
3
5


shouts, and how to be on the alert so that, even if they found themselves in a 
real war, they should not be frightened, but should courageously move 
against the enemy as if it were a game. Taking in his hands the likeness of the 
Man God the one that was not painted by hand, but which the Logos, who 
shapes and fashions everything, wrought like an image without recourse to 
painting, just as He experienced birth without seed the emperor placed his 
trust in this image painted by God and began his endeavors after giving a 
pledge to his army that he would struggle with them unto death and would be 
united with them as with his own children; for he wished his authority to be 
derived not from fear, but rather from love. Having found, then, the army 
in a state of great sluggishness, cowardice, indiscipline, and disorder, and 
scattered over many parts of the earth, he speedily gathered everyone together. 
As by common agreement, everyone praised the might and courage of the 
emperor. And he spoke to them these words of encouragement: 'You see, 0 
my brethren and children, how the enemies of God have trampled upon our 
land, have laid our cities   304   waste, have burnt our sanctuaries and 
have filled with the blood of murder the altars of the bloodless sacrifice; 
how they defile with their impassioned pleasures our churches, which do 
not admit of the passions.'  Once again he prepared the army for a 
warlike exercise and informed two armed contingents; and the trumpeters, 
the ranks of shield bearers and men in armour stood by. When he had 
securely marshaled the two companies he bade them attack each other: 
there were violent collisions and mutual conflict, and a semblance of war 
was to be seen. One could observe a frightening sight, yet one without the 
fear of danger, murderous clashes without blood, the forms (of violence) 
without violence, so that each man might draw a lesson from that safe 
slaughter and remain more secure. Having in this manner fortified 
everyone, he bade them abstain from injustice and cleave to piety.
  When he had reached the region of Armenia, he ordered (a band of 
picked men to take the van. The Saracens were then tributaries of the 
Persians,) and a multitude of their horsemen were intending to fall upon 
the emperor unawares. But the emperor's advance party met them and 
brought their leader captive to Herakleios; and having routed them, killed a 
great number. Since winter had set in, and the emperor had turned aside 
(to) the region of Pontos, the barbarians decided (to besiege him) in his 
winter quarters. Evading the Persians, however, he turned round and 
invaded Persia. When the barbarians learnt of this, they were cast down by 
the unexpectedness of his invasion. As for Sarbaros, the Persian 
commander, he

took his forces and  came to Cilicia that he might tum the emperor round 
by his attack on Roman territory. Fearing, however, lest the emperor 
invade Persia by way of Armenia and cause disturbance therein, he could 
not make up his mind what to do. Even so, he was compelled to follow 
the Roman army from behind, seeking a     305 chance to steal a fight and 
attack them on a dark night. But there was that night a full moon and he 
was foiled in his scheme and uttered imprecations against the moon whom 
he had previously worshipped; and it so happened that the moon suffered 
an eclipse that night. Because of this, Sarbaros was afraid to attack the 
emperor and he made for the mountains as the deer do, and observed from 
a height the beautifully ordered generalship of the Romans. When the 
emperor became aware of his cowardice, he boldly encamped in places 
affording ample repose and provoked him to war. Often the Persians would 
come secretly down from the mountains and engage in sporadic conflict, 
and on all occasions the Romans had the upper hand and their army was 
further emboldened by seeing the emperor dashing forward in front of all 
the others and fighting courageously. There was a certain Persian, who a 
short time previously had come as a runaway and joined the emperor's 
army. This man escaped and went over to the Persians expecting them to 
destroy the Roman armament. But when he had perceived their cowardice, 
he returned to the emperor on the tenth day and reported to him exactly the 
barbarians' timidity.
  As for Sarbaros, he could not endure any longer his sojourn on the mountain 
and was compelled to rush into battle. He divided his army into three parts 
and suddenly came down at daybreak, before the sun had risen, all ready for 
war. But the emperor had foreseen this, and he, too, marshaled his army into 
three phalanxes and led them into battle. When the sun had risen, the 
emperor happened to be on the east side so that the sun's rays blinded the 
Persians, those rays that they worshipped as a god. The emperor feigned that 
his men had turned to flight and the Persians broke their ranks to pursue 
them, as they thought, without restraint. But the Romans turned round and 
routed them valiantly; they killed many men and others they drove to the 
mountain and pushed them into precipices and inaccessible places and 
destroyed all of them. And in those precipices they remained like wild 
goats, while many were captured alive. The Persian camp and all their 
equipment were also 306
taken. The Romans raised their arms aloft to give thanks to God and to praise 
earnestly their emperor who had led them well. For they, who previously 
had not dared to behold the Persians' dust, now found their tents undisturbed 
and looted them. Who had expected
437
that the hard fighting race of the Persians would ever show their backs to 
the Romans? As for the emperor, he left the army with its commander to 
winter in Armenia, while he himself returned to Byzantium.



Year of the divine Incarnation 614
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 13th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (39 years), 35th year Sergius, 
bishop of Constantinople (29 years), 14th year Zacharias, bishop 
of Jerusalem (22 years), 14th year George, bishop of Alexandria 
(14 years), 4th year

In this year, on 15 March, indiction 11, the emperor Herakleios set out from 
the Imperial City and speedily arrived in Armenia. As for
438

Chosroes, the emperor of the Persians, he dispatched Sarbarazas, with his 
own army, to invade Roman territory. Herakleios wrote a letter to Chosroes 
bidding him embrace peace; if not, he would invade Persia with his army. 
But Chosroes neither embraced peace nor did he take any account of the 
statement that Herakleios would dare approach Persia. And on 20 April the 
emperor invaded Persia. When Chosroes learnt of this, he ordered 
Sarbarazas to tum back; and having gathered his armies from all of Persia, 
he entrusted them to Sain, whom he commanded to join Sarbarazas with all 
speed and
so proceed against the emperor. As for Herakleios, he called together 307
his troops and roused them with these words of exhortation: Men, my 
brethren, let us keep in mind the fear of God and fight to avenge the insult done 
to God. Let us stand bravely against the enemy who have inflicted many 
terrible things on the Christians. Let us respect the sovereign state of the 
Romans and oppose the enemy who are armed with impiety. Let us be 
inspired with faith that defeats murder. Let us be mindful of the fact that we are 
within the Persian land and that flight carries a great danger. Let us avenge the 
rape of our virgins and be afflicted in our hearts as we see the severed limbs of 
our soldiers. The danger is not without recompense: nay, it leads to the eternal 
life. Let us stand bravely, and the Lord our God will assist us and destroy the 
enemy.'
  When the emperor had spoken these and many other words of 
exhortation, they replied one and all: 'Thou hast expanded our hearts, 0 Sire, 
by opening thy lips to encourage us. Thy words have sharpened our swords 
and imbued them with life. Thou hast given us wing by thy statements. We 
blush to see thee leading us in battle, and we follow thy commands.'!
  So the emperor took up his army and straight away made for the heart of 
Persia, burning the towns and villages. And there happened at this stage an 
awesome miracle. For at the time of the summer solstice the air became cool 
and refreshed the Roman army so that they became filled with fair hopes. 
And when Herakleios heard that Chosroes was in the town of Gazakos with 
40,000 fighting men, he rushed against him. He sent forward some of his 
subject Saracens as an advance party and they encountered the watch of 
Chosroes, some of whom they killed, whilst others they captured and 
brought to the emperor together with their commander. When he had learnt 
of this, Chosroes abandoned the town and his army and took to flight. 
Herakleios gave pursuit, and some he overtook and killed, whilst the rest 
escaped and scattered. And when the emperor reached the town
of Gazakos, (he restored his army in its suburbs. The Persians who 308
had taken refuge with him said that Chosroes had destroyed with 
439

fire all the crops in those parts and had fled to the town of Thebarmais) 
in the east, wherein were the temple of Fire and the treasure of Croesus, 
king of Lydia, and the deceit of the coals. Setting out from Gazakos, the 
emperor reached Thebarmais, which he entered and burnt down the 
temple of Fire as well as the entire city; and he pursued Chosroes in the 
defiles of the land of the Medes. Chosroes went from place to place in 
this difficult terrain, whilst Herakleios, as he was pursuing him, captured 
many towns and lands. When winter had set in, he took counsel to decide 
where he should winter together with his army. Some said that they 
should do so in Albania, others that they should push ahead against 
Chosroes himself. The emperor ordered that the army should purify itself 
for three days. He then opened the holy Gospel and found a passage that 
directed him to winter in Albania. So he immediately turned back and 
hastened to Albania. As he had with him numerous Persian captives, he 
was the object of several attacks by the Persian troops on the intervening 
journey, but with God's help was victorious against all of them. In spite 
of the severe winter cold that overtook him on the way, he reached 
Albania with 50,000 captives whom, in his compassionate heart, he pitied 
and liberated. He granted them proper care and repose so that all of them 
prayed with tears in their eyes that he should become the savior even of 
Persia and slay Chosroes, the destroyer of the world.

440




(AM 6115, AD 622/3]
Herakleios
, 14th year 
Chosroes, 
36th year 
Sergius, 
15th year 
Zacharias, 
15th year 
George, 
5th year
In this year Chosroes, emperor of the Persians, appointed as his 
commander Sarablangas, an energetic man filled with great vanity; 
and having entrusted him with the contingents of the so called 
Chosroegetai and Perozitai, sent him against Herakleios in 
Albania.	309 They pushed ahead to the boundaries of Albania, but did not dare confront the emperor in battle; instead, they seized the passes that
led to Persia in the belief that they would trap him. At the 
beginning of spring Herakleios set out from Albania and made 
his way towards Persia through level plains that provided an 
abundance of food, even if, by this lengthy detour, he was 
covering a great distance. Sarablangas, on the other hand, 
pushed ahead by the narrow and shorter way so as to 
anticipate him in Persian territory.
  Herakleios exhorted his army with these words: 'Let us be 
aware, 0 brethren, that the Persian army, as it wanders 
through difficult country, is exhausting and debilitating its 
horses. As for us, let us hasten with all speed against 
Chosroes so that, falling upon him unexpectedly, we may 
throw him into confusion.' The troops, however, opposed 
this course, especially the Laz, Abasgian, and Iberian allies. 
For this reason they fell into misfortune. For Sarbarazas, too, 
had arrived with his troops, whom Chosroes had armed 
mightily and sent against Herakleios by way of Armenia. As 
for Sarablangas, he was following Herakleios from behind 
and did not engage him, expecting, as he did, to join 
Sarbarazas and then give battle. When
4
4
1
the Romans had been apprised of the onset of Sarbarazas, they were seized 
by timidity and fell at the emperor's feet, repenting with tears of their 
misguided disobedience; for they knew how great an evil it is when a 
servant does not yield to his master's wishes. And they said: 'Stretch out 
your hand, 0 lord, before we miserable ones perish. We obey you in 
whatever you command.' Then the emperor hastened to engage 
Sarablangas before the latter had been joined by the army of Sarbarazas and, 
having made many sorties against him both by night and by day, reduced 
him to a state of timidity. Leaving both of them in his rear, he pushed on 
with all speed against Chosroes. Now two Romans deserted to the Persians 
and persuaded them that the Romans were fleeing out of cowardice. Another 
rumour had also reached them, namely that Sain, the Persian commander, 
was coming
310   to their help with another army. When Sarablangas and Sarbarazas learnt 
this, they strove to engage Herakleios in battle before Sain had arrived 
and transferred to himself the glory of victory. Trusting also the 
deserters, they moved against Herakleios and, when they drew near to 
him, encamped, intending to engage him in the morning. But Herakleios 
set out in the evening and marched all night; and when he had gone a 
long distance from them, he found a grassy plain and encamped in it. 
The barbarians, thinking that he was fleeing out of cowardice, pushed on 
in a disorderly manner so as to overtake him. But he met them and gave 
battle. He occupied a certain wooded hill and, gathering there his army, 
routed the barbarians with God's help and slew a multitude of them after 
pursuing them through the ravines. (Sarablangas fell, too, struck with a 
sword in his back.) As these struggles were going on, Sain also arrived 
with his army, and the emperor routed him and slew many of his men, 
whilst the rest he scattered as they were fleeing; and he captured their 
camp equipment. Sarbarazas then joined forces with Sain and gathered 
together the barbarians who had survived. And, once again, they made 
plans to move against Herakleios. As for the emperor, he pushed on to 
the land of the Huns, through the rough and inaccessible places of their 
difficult country, while the barbarians followed him from behind. Now 
the Lazi and the Abasgians took fright; they broke their alliance with the 
Romans and returned to their own country. Sain was pleased at this and, 
together with Sarbaros, eagerly pressed on against Herakleios. The 
emperor gathered his troops and gave them courage by assuaging them 
with these words of exhortation: 'Be not disturbed, 0 brethren, by the 
multitude (of the enemy). For when God wills it, one man will rout a 
thousand. So let us sacrifice ourselves to God for the salvation of our 
brothers.
311	May we win the crown of martyrdom so that we may be praised in
442

the future and receive our recompense from God.' Having with these 
and many other words encouraged the army, he arranged the battle 
order with joyful countenance. The two sides faced each other across a 
short distance from morning until evening, but did not engage. When 
evening had fallen, the emperor continued his march; and again the 
barbarians pressed on behind him. Wishing to overtake him, they took 
another route, but fell into marshy ground, went astray, and 
experienced great danger. So the emperor crossed over and went by the 
regions of Persarmenia. That country being under Persian control, 
many men joined Sarbarazas and so increased his army. And when it 
was winter, the multitude dispersed in their own lands so as to take rest 
(in their houses). When Herakleios learnt of this, he decided to steal a 
battle by night. The winter, then, having set in, and Sarbaros not 
suspecting anything, he selected the strongest horses and the bravest 
soldiers and divided them into two. The first part he ordered to move 
ahead against Sarbaros, whilst he himself followed behind with the rest. 
So they hastened through the night and reached the village Salbanon at 
the ninth hour of the night. The Persians who were there became aware 
of the attack: they rose up and rushed to resist, but the Romans slew all of 
them, except one who brought the news to Sarbaros. Rising up and 
mounting his horse, naked and unshod as he was, Sarbaros found his 
salvation in flight. His wives and the flower of the Persians, that is 
the commanders, satraps, and picked soldiers, were apprehended as they 
had climbed to the roofs of their houses and were preparing to fight. 
Herakleios brought them down by means of fire, and some he slew, 
others he burnt, whilst others were bound in fetters, so that nearly no 
one escaped except for Sarbaros. They took the arms of Sarbaros, 312
namely his golden shield, his sword, lance, gold belt set with 
precious stones, and boots. When Herakleios had taken these things, 
he moved against the Persians who were scattered in the villages. 
These men, on learning of the flight of Sarbaros, also fled without 
restraint. He pursued them, killed or captured many of them, whilst 
the remainder returned to Persia in disgrace. As for the emperor, he 
joyfully collected his army and wintered in those parts.



AM 6II6 [AD 623/4]
Year of the divine Incarnation 616
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 15th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (39 years), 37th year 
Sergius, bishop of Constantinople (29 years), 16th year 
Zacharias, bishop of Jerusalem (22 years), 16th year 
George, bishop of Alexandria (14 years), 6th year
In this year, on 1March, the emperor Herakleios collected his army and 
took counsel as to which road he should follow: for two roads lay before 
him, both narrow and difficult, one leading to Taranton, the other to 
the land of Syria. And whereas the one to Taranton was superior, it 
lacked every kind of food supply, whereas the one to Syria that went 
over the Tauras provided a plentiful abundance of food. Everyone gave 
preference to the latter, even though it was steeper and covered with 
much snow. So, after traversing it with great toil, they reached in seven 
days the river Tigris, which they crossed and arrived at Martyropolis 
and Amida. The army and the captives rested there. From there the 
emperor was able to send 
313 letters to Byzantium in which he described all his actions, thus causing 
great joy in the City. As for Sarbaros, he collected his scattered army and 
went after him. The emperor picked a band of soldiers and sent them to 
guard the passes leading to his position and sallying forth to the eastward 
passages, he moved to confront Sarbaros. He crossed the Nymphios river 
and reached the Euphrates, where there was a pontoon bridge made of 
rope and boats. Sarbaros untied the ropes from one shore and shifted the 
whole bridge to the other. When the emperor came and was unable to 
cross by the bridge, he went by and found a ford which he safely 
traversed, an unexpected feat in the month of March, and so reached 
Samosata. Once again he went over the Tauros and arrived at 
Germanikeiai and, going by Adana, he came to the river Saros. Now 
Sarbaros stretched the bridge back to its former place and, crossing the 
Euphrates without hindrance, followed him from behind. The emperor 
crossed the bridge of the Saros and, finding a place to rest his army and 
horses, encamped there. Sarbaros, in the meantime, reached the 
opposite bank. He found the bridge and its forward bastions occupied by 
the


Romans, so he encamped. Now many of the Romans made disor­ 
derly sorties across the bridge and attacked the Persians, among 
whom they caused much slaughter. The emperor forbade them to 
sally forth indiscriminately lest the enemy found a means of enter­ ing 
the bridge and crossing it at the same time they did, but the army did not 
obey the emperor. Now Sarbaros set up ambuscades and, feigning 
flight, drew many of the Romans to cross over in pursuit against the 
emperor's wish. He then turned round and routed them,
and killed as many as he overtook outside the bridge, a punishment
	
3 I4 of their disobedience. When the emperor saw that the barbarians had 
broken ranks in pursuit and that many of the Romans who were standing 
upon the bastions were being slain, he moved against them.
A giant of a man confronted the emperor in the middle of the bridge 
and attacked him, but the emperor struck him and threw him into the 
river. When this man had fallen, the barbarians turned to flight and, 
because of the narrowness of the bridge, jumped into the river like 
frogs, whilst others were being killed by the sword. But the bulk of 
the barbarians poured over the river bank: they shot arrows and 
resisted the passage of the Romans. The emperor did cross to the 
other side and bravely opposed the barbarians with a few men of his 
guard. He fought in a superhuman manner so that even Sarbaros was 
astonished and said (to) one Kosmas (a runaway Roman and an 
apostate) who was standing close to him: 'Do you see, 0 Kosmas, 
how boldly the Caesar stands in battle, how he fights alone against 
such a multitude and wards off blows like an anvil?' For he was 
recognized by his purple boots, and received many blows, although 
none (of a serious nature in this battle. And after they had fought 
this battle all day,) when evening came, they drew apart. Sarbaros 
became frightened and retreated in the night. As for the emperor, he 
collected his army and hastened to the city of Sebasteia. After 
crossing the river Halys, he spent the whole winter in that land. 
  Chosroes in his rage sent emissaries to confiscate the treasure of 
all the churches that were under Persian rule. And he forced the 
Christians to convert to the religion of Nestorios so as to wound the 
emperor.
Mamed, leader of the Arabs, 9 years.



Herakleios,	6th 
year Chosroes, 
38th year Sergius, 
17th year 
Zacharias, 17th 
year George, 7th 
year
In this year Chosroes, emperor of Persia, made a new levy by 
conscripting strangers, citizens, and slaves whom he selected from 
every nation. He placed this picked body under the command of Sain 
and gave him, in addition, another 50,000 men chosen from the 
phalanx of Sarbaros. He called them the Golden Spearmen and sent 
them against the emperor. As for Sarbaros, he dispatched him with 
his remaining army against Constantinople with a view to 
establishing an alliance between the western Huns (who are called 
Avars) and the Bulgars, Slavs, and Gepids, and so advancing on the 
City and laying siege to it. When the emperor learnt of this, he 
divided his army into three contingents: the first he sent to protect 
the City; the second he entrusted to his own brother Theodore, 
whom he ordered to fight Sain; the third part he took himself and 
advanced to Lazica. During his stay there he invited the eastern 
Turks, who are called Chazars, to become his allies. Now Sain with 
his newly recruited army overtook the emperor's brother and prepared 
for battle. With God's help (by the mediation of the all praised 
Theotokos),
446

when battle was joined a storm of hail fell unexpectedly on the 
barbarians and struck down many of them, whereas the Roman array 
enjoyed fair weather. So the Romans routed the Persians and slew a 
great multitude of them. When Chosroes learnt of this, he was 
angered at Sain. And Sain, because of his great despondency fell ill 
and died. By order of Chosroes his body was preserved in salt and 
conveyed to him and, though it was dead, he subjected it to ill 
treatment.
Now the Chazars broke through the Caspian Gates and invaded	316
Persia, that is the land of Adraigan, under their commander Ziebel 
who was second in rank after the Chagan. And in all the lands they 
traversed they made the Persians captive and burnt the towns and 
villages. The emperor, too, set out from Lazica and joined them. 
When Ziebel saw him, he rushed to meet him, kissed his neck, and 
did obeisance to him, while the Persians were looking on from the 
town of Tiphilios. And the entire army of the Turks fell flat on the 
ground and, stretched out on their faces, reverenced the emperor with 
an honour that is unknown among alien nations. Likewise, their 
commanders climbed on rocks and fell flat in the same manner. 
Ziebel also brought before the emperor his adolescent son, and he 
took as much pleasure in the emperor's conversation as he was 
astonished by his appearance and wisdom. After picking 40,000 brave 
men, Ziebel gave them to the emperor as allies, while he himself 
returned to his own land. Taking these men along, the emperor 
advanced on Chosroes.
  As for Sarbaros, he attacked Chalcedon, while the Avars 
approached the City by way of Thrace with a view to capturing it. 
They set in motion many engines against it and filled the gulf of the 
Horn with an immense multitude, beyond all number, whom they 
had brought from the Danube in carved boats. After investing the 
City by land and sea for ten days, they were vanquished by God's 
might and help and by the intercession of the immaculate Virgin, the 
Mother of God. Having lost great numbers, both on land and on sea, 
they shamefully returned to their country. Sarbaros, however, who was 
besieging Chalcedon, did not depart, but wintered there, laying waste 
and pillaging the regions and towns across the strait.
4
4
7

317	AM 6118 (AD 625/6)
Year of the divine Incarnation 618
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 17th year 
Chosroes, emperor of the Persians (39 years), 39th year 
Sergius, bishop of Constantinople (29 years), 18th year 
Zacharias, bishop of Jerusalem (22 years), 18th year George, 
bishop of Alexandria (14 years), 8th year
In this year the emperor Herakleios, by invading Persia together with 
the Turks starting in the month of September, an unexpected move, since 
it was winter, threw Chosroes into a state of distraction when the news 
had reached him. But the Turks, in view of the winter and the constant 
attacks of the Persians, could not bear to toil together with the emperor 
and started, little by little, to slip away until all of them had left and 
returned home. Now the emperor addressed his troops, saying: 'Know, 
0 brothers, that no one wishes to fight with us, except God and His 
Mother who bore Him without seed, and this that He may show His 
might, (since salvation does not lie in the abundance of soldiers and 
weapons, but to those who trust in His mercy) He sends down His aid.'
  As for Chosroes, he collected all his armies and appointed Razates 
commander over them, a most warlike and brave man,
448


   whom he sent against Herakleios. The emperor meanwhile was 
burning the towns and villages of Persia and putting to the sword the 
Persians he captured. On 9 October of the 15th indiction he reached the 
land of Chamaetha, where he rested his army for one week. As for 
Razates, he came to Gazakos, in the emperor's rear, and followed him, 
while the Romans, in front, were destroying the crops. Trailing behind, 
like a hungry dog, he fed with difficulty on the
   emperor's crumbs. On 1 December the emperor reached the Great 318 Zabas 
river, which he crossed and encamped near the town of Nineveh. Following him, 
Razates, too, came to the ford and, going another three miles downstream, found 
another ford which he crossed. The emperor sent out the commander Baanes 
with a small
   body of picked soldiers; the latter encountered a company of Persians 
and, after killing their captain, brought back his head and his sword, which 
was all of gold. He killed many more and made twenty six captive, among 
whom was the sword bearer of Razates. This man announced to the 
emperor that Razates was intending to give battle on orders from Chosroes, 
who had sent him 3,000 armed men; but these had not yet arrived. When 
the emperor had been informed of this, he sent ahead his camp equipment 
and himself followed, seeking a place in which to give battle before the 
3,000 had joined the enemy. And when he had found a plain suitable for 
fighting, he addressed his troops and drew them up in battle order. Upon 
arriving there, Razates also drew up his army in three dense formations 
and advanced on the emperor. Battle was given on Saturday, 12 December. 
The emperor sallied forward in front of everyone and met the commander 
of the Persians, and, by God's might and the help of the Theotokos, threw 
him down; and those who had sallied forth with him were routed. Then the 
emperor met another Persian in combat and cast him down also. Yet a third 
assailed him and struck him with a spear, wounding his lip; but the emperor 
slew him, too. And when the trumpets had sounded, the two sides attacked 
each other and, as a violent battle was being waged, the emperor's tawny 
horse called Dorkon, was wounded in the thigh by some infantryman who 
struck it with a spear. It also received several blows of the sword on the 
face, but, wearing as it did a cataphract
   made of sinew, it was not hurt, nor were the blows effective. Razates 319 fell 
in battle, as did the three divisional commanders of the Persians,
   nearly all of their officers, and the greater part of their army. As for 
the Romans, fifty were killed and a considerable number wounded, but 
they did not die, save for another ten. That battle was waged from 
morning until the 11th hour. The Romans captured twenty eight standards 
of the Persians, not counting those that had been
449
       broken and, having despoiled the dead, took their corselets, 
helmets, and all their arms. And the two sides remained at a distance of 
two bowshots from one another for there was no retreat. The Roman 
soldiers watered their horses at night and fed them. But the Persian 
horsemen stood until the 7th hour of the night over the bodies of their 
dead; and at the 8th hour of the night they set forth and returned to their 
camp; and taking it up they went away and encamped in fear at the foot 
of a rugged mountain. The Romans took many gold swords and gold 
belts set with pearls and the shield of Razates, which was all of gold 
and had 120 laminae and his gold breastplate; and they brought in his 
caftan together with his head, and his bracelets and his gold saddle. And 
Barsamouses, the prince of the Iberians who are subject to Persia, was 
taken alive. (No one can remember such a battle being waged between 
Persians) and Romans inasmuch as it did not cease all day; and if the 
Romans won, they did so only by God's help. 
       After encouraging his army, the emperor pushed on against 
Chosroes with a view to frightening him and making him recall   320 
Sarbaros from Byzantium [from Chalcedon]. On 21 December the 
emperor was informed that the army of Razates, as much of it as had 
escaped from the battle, had been joined by the 3,000 men dispatched 
by Chosroes and had reached Nineveh in pursuit of him. After crossing 
the Great Zabas, the emperor (dispatched the turmarch George with 
1,000 men to ride forward and seize the bridges of the Lesser Zabas) 
before Chosroes had become aware of it. After riding forty eight miles, 
George seized the four bridges of the Lesser Zabas in the night and 
captured the Persians he found in the forts. On 23 December the 
emperor reached the bridges crossed them, and encamped in the 
mansions of Iesdem; he rested both his army and his horses and 
celebrated the feast of Christs Nativity in that place. When Chosroes 
was informed that the Romans had seized the bridges of the Lesser 
Zabas, he sent a message to the army that had been under Razates that 
they should try very hard to overtake the emperor so as to join him. 
Making haste they crossed the Lesser Zabas in another place and 
overtook the emperor in front of whom they now marched. As for the 
emperor he came upon (a palace called Dezeridan which he destroyed 
and burnt while the Persians crossed the bridge of the river Tomas and 
encamped there. The emperor came upon) a second palace of Chosroes 
called Rousa and this too, he destroyed. He suspected that the enemy 
were going to fight him at the bridge of the river Tomas; but when they 
saw him, they abandoned the bridge and fled. So the emperor crossed 
without hindrance and reached another palace called


450

Beklal; here a hippodrome had been built, and he destroyed it. Several 
of the Armenians who accompanied the Persians came to the emperor (at 
night) and said: 'Chosroes with his elephants and his own army is 
encamped five miles on this side of the palace called 321 Dastagerd, in 
a place called Barasroth, and he has given instructions that his forces 
should assemble there and fight you. There is a river there that is 
difficult to cross, and a narrow bridge, and many cramped spaces 
between buildings, and fetid streams.' After taking counsel with his 
officers and his army, the emperor remained in the palace of Beklal. He 
found therein in one enclosure 300 corn fed ostriches, and in another 
about 500 corn fed gazelles, and in another 100 corn fed wild asses, and 
all of these he gave to his soldiers. And they celebrated r January there. 
They also found sheep, pigs, and oxen without number, and the whole 
army rested contentedly and gave glory to God. They caught the 
herdsmen of these cattle and were exactly informed by them that 
Chosroes had learnt on 23 December that the emperor had crossed the 
bridge of the Tomas and forthwith set out from the palace of Dastagerd 
(making all speed for Ctesiphon, and all the money he had in the palace 
he loaded on the elephants, camels, and mules that were in his 
service, and he wrote to the army of Razates that they should enter that 
same palace and the houses of the noblemen and take away anything 
they found therein. So the emperor sent one half of his army to 
Dastagerd), while he himself went by a different road to another 
palace called Bebdarch. This, too, they destroyed and burnt, and they 
thanked God for having wrought such wonders by the intercession of 
the Theotokos. For who had expected that Chosroes would flee 
before the Roman emperor from his palace at Dastagerd and go off to 
Ctesiphon, when, for twenty four years, he would not suffer to behold 
Ctesiphon, but had his 322   royal residence at Dastagerd? In his palace 
of Dastagerd the Roman army found 300 Roman standards which the 
Persians had captured at different times. They also found the goods that 
had been left behind, namely a great quantity of aloes and big pieces of 
aloes wood, each weighing 70 or 80 lbs., much silk and pepper, more 
linen shirts than one could count, sugar, ginger, and many other goods. 
Others found silver, silken garments, woolen rugs, and woven carpets, 
a great quantity of them and very beautiful, but on account of their 
weight they burnt them all. They also burnt the tents of Chosroes and 
the porticoes he set up whenever he encamped in a plain, and many 
of his statues. They also found in this palace an infinite number of 
ostriches, gazelles, wild asses, peacocks, and pheasant, and in the 
hunting park huge live lions and tigers. Many of the captives from 
Edessa, Alexandria, and
4
5
1

other cities, a great throng of them, sought refuge with the emperor. The 
emperor celebrated at Dastagerd the feast of the Epiphany; he gladdened 
and restored his army while he destroyed the palaces of Chosroes. These 
priceless, wonderful and astonishing structures he demolished to the 
ground so that Chosroes might learn how great a pain the Romans had 
suffered when their cities were laid waste and burnt by him. Many of the 
palace diaitarii were also arrested and, on being interrogated as to when 
Chosroes had departed from Dastagerd, they said: 'Nine days before your 
arrival he heard of your presence and secretly made a hole in the city 
wall near
	323	the palace. In this way he went out unhindered through the 
gardens, he with his wife and children, so there should not be a tumult in 
the city.' Indeed, neither his army was aware of it nor his noblemen until 
he had gone five miles; at which point he announced that they should 
follow him in the direction of Ctesiphon. And this man who was incapable 
of travelling five miles in one day, travelled twenty five in his flight. His 
wives and children, who previously had not laid eyes on one another, now 
fled in disorder, one jostling the other. When night had fallen, Chosroes 
took shelter in the house of an insignificant farmer whose door barely let 
him through. When, later, Herakleios saw that door, he was amazed. In 
three days Chosroes reached Ctesiphon. Twenty four years earlier, when 
he besieged Daras in the days of the Roman emperor Phokas, he had been 
given an oracle by his magicians and astrologers, namely that he would 
perish at the time he went to Ctesiphon; and although he would not suffer 
to go one mile in that direction from Dastagerd, he now went to Ctesiphon 
as he fled. But even there he did not dare stop; nay, he crossed the pontoon 
bridge over the river Tigris to the town on the other side, which is called 
Seleukeia by the Romans and Gouedeser by the Persians. He deposited 
all his money there and remained there with his wife Seirem and three 
other women who were his daughters. His remaining wives and his many 
children he sent to a stronghold forty miles to the east.
  Now some Persia ns spoke slanderously to Chosroes concerning 
Sarbaros, namely that the latter was on the side of the Roma ns and 
railed at him. So he sent one of his sword bearers to Chalcedon with an 
order to Kardarigas, Sarbaros' fellow commander, in which he wrote that 
Kardarigas should kill Sarbaros and, taking along the Persian army, 
hasten to Persia to assist him. But the messenger who carried the letter 
was apprehended by the Roma ns in the area of
	324	Galatia. His captors, eluding the Persia ns, brought him to 
Byzantium and handed him over to the emperor's son. When the young 
emperor had ascertained the truth from the courier, he straight away
452
sent for Sarbaros, who came into the emperor's presence. The 
emperor handed him the letter addressed to Kardarigas and showed 
him the messenger. Sarbaros read the letter and, being satisfied of 
its truth, immediately changed sides and made a covenant with the 
emperor's son and the patriarch. He falsified Chosroes' letter by 
inserting in it the instruction that, along with himself, another four 
hundred satraps, commanders, tribunes, and centurions should be 
killed, and he cunningly replaced the seal on it. He then convened 
his commanders and Kardarigas himself and, after reading the letter, 
said to Kardarigas: 'Are you resolved to do this?' The commanders 
were filled with anger and renounced Chosroes, and they made a 
peaceful settlement with the emperor. After taking common counsel, 
they decided to depart from Chalcedon and return home without 
causing any damage.
  Now Herakleios wrote to Chosroes: I am pursuing you as I 
hasten towards peace. For it is not of my free will that I am burning 
Persia, but constrained by you. Let us, therefore, throw down our 
arms even now and embrace peace. Let us extinguish the fire before 
it consumes everything.' But Chosroes did not accept these 
proposals, and so the hatred of the Persian people grew against him. 
He conscripted all the retainers of his noblemen and all his servants 
and those of his wives and, having armed them, sent them to join the 
army of Razates and take a stand on the river Narbas, twelve miles 
from Ctesiphon. He commanded them that when the emperor had 
crossed the river, they should cut the pontoon bridge. As for the 
emperor, he set out from Dastagerd on 7 January and, after marching
three days, encamped twelve miles from the river Narbas, where the
	
325 Persian camp lay and where they had 200 elephants. The emperor
sent George, turmarch of the Armeniacs, as far as the river to 
ascertain whether the Narbas had a ford. And when he had found 
that they had cut the bridges and that the Narbas had no ford, he 
returned to the emperor. Setting forth, the emperor came to Siazouros 
and, for the whole of the month of February, he went about burning 
the villages and the towns. In the month of March he came to a village 
called Barzan, where he spent seven days; and he dispatched the 
commander Mezezios on a foray. A certain Goundabousan, who was 
captain of a thousand men in the army of Sarbaros, went over to him 
together with five others, three of whom were captains and two officers 
of other rank; and he brought them to the emperor. This man 
Goundabousan announced some vital news to the emperor, saying that 
'When Chosroes fled from Dastagerd and went to Ctesiphon and 
Seleukeia, he contracted dysentery and wanted to crown his son 
Merdasan who was born to Seirem. And
45 
3
he crossed the river again and brought with him Merdasan along 
with Seirem and her other son Saliar. As for his first born son Siroes 
and his brothers and wives, he left them on the other side of the river. 
When Siroes was informed that Chosroes was intending to crown 
Merdasan, he was troubled and sent his foster brother to 
Goundabousan with this message, "Come to the other side of the 
river that I may meet you." But Goundabousan was afraid to cross on 
account of Chosroes and declared to him, "Write me whatever it is 
you wish through your foster brother." So Siroes wrote him the 
following: "You know how the Persian state has been destroyed by 
this evil man Chosroes, and now he intends to crown Merdasan and
	326	has scorned me, the first born. If you tell the army that they 
should accept me, I shall increase their pay and make peace with the 
Roman emperor (and with the Turks), and we shall live in plenty. So 
strive with your men that I should become king. I will then promote 
and support all of you, and yourself in particular." I informed him 
through his foster brother that I would speak to the army and strive to 
the best of my ability. And I spoke to twenty two captains and won 
them over to my views, as well as many other officers and soldiers. I 
announced this to Siroes, who instructed me that on 23 March I 
should take some young regulars and meet him at the pontoon bridge of 
the Tigris river, present him to the army, and set forth against 
Chosroes. And, furthermore, that Siroes had with him the two sons 
of Sarbarazas, the son of Iesdem, the son of Aram, and many other 
sons of noblemen a select company. If they succeed in killing 
Chosroes, well and good; but if they fail, all of them, including Siroes, 
will go over to the emperor. He sent me to you, 0 lord, because he 
feels ashamed before the Roman Empire; for, once upon a time, it 
saved Chosroes and, on his account, the land of the Romans has 
suffered many ills. Because of his ingratitude, he says, the emperor 
will have no reason to trust me either.'
  Now the emperor sent this man back to Siroes with the message 
that he should open the prisons and bring out the Romans confined 
therein, and give them arms, and so move against Chosroes. Siroes 
obeyed the emperor and, after releasing the prisoners, attacked his 
parricide father Chosroes. The latter tried to escape, but failed and 
was captured. They bound him securely with iron fetters, his elbows 
behind his back, and hung iron weights on his feet and his neck, and 
so cast him in the House of Darkness, which he himself had
	327	fortified and rebuilt to deposit his moneys therein; and they 
starved him by giving him a paltry amount of bread and water. For 
Siroes said, 'Let him eat the gold he collected in vain, on account of 
which he starved many men and made the world desolate.' He sent 
to
454

him the satraps that they might insult him and spit upon him, and he 
brought Mardesan, whom he had wished to crown, and slew him in his 
presence, and all his remaining children were killed in front of him, and 
he sent all his enemies that they might insult him, strike him, and spit 
upon him. After doing this for five days, Siroes commanded that he 
should be killed with bow and arrows, and thus in slow pain he gave 
up his wicked soul. Then Siroes wrote to the emperor to give him the 
good tidings of the slaying of the foul Chosroes; and after making 
with him a permanent peace, he handed back to him all the imprisoned 
Christians and the captives held in every part of Persia together with the 
patriarch Zacharias and the precious and life giving Cross that had been 
taken from Jerusalem by Sarbarazas, when the latter captured Jerusalem.

45 5
		





Year of the divine Incarnation 619 
Herakleios, 18th year
Siroes, emperor the Persians (1 year), 1st year. (At which time also 
Moamed, leader of the Arabs, i.e. the Saracens, living under the 
Persians, was in his 6th year out of a total of 9)
Sergius, 19th year 
Zacharias, 19th year 
George, 9th year
In this year, peace having been concluded between the Persians and the 
Romans, the emperor sent his brother Theodore bearing letters and 
accompanied by emissaries of Siroes, emperor of Persia, with a view to 
sending back peacefully to Persia those Persians who were at Edessa, in 
Palestine, Jerusalem, and in other Roman towns: those were to cross 
Roman territory without harm. Now the emperor, having defeated Persia 
in the course of six years, made peace in the seventh and returned with 
great joy to Constantinople, thereby fulfilling a certain mystical allegory: 
for God completed all of creation in six days and called the seventh a 
day of rest. So the emperor also, after undergoing many toils for six 
years, returned in the seventh to the 328 City amid peace and joy, and 
took his rest. When the people of the City had learnt of his coming, all of 
them, with unrestrained eagerness, went out to meet him at Hiereia, 
together with the patriarch and the emperor Constantine, his son, 
holding olive branches and lights and acclaiming him with tears of joy. 
Coming forward, his son fell at his feet and embraced him, and they 
both shed tears on the ground. At the sight of this, all the people sent up 
to God hymns of thanksgiving. After receiving the emperor in this 
fashion, they entered the City dancing with joy.
4
57

AM 6120 (AD 627/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 620 Herakleios, 
19th year
Adeser, emperor of the Persians (7 months), 1st year Sergius, 
20th year
Zacharias, 20th year George, 
10th year
In this year, setting forth from the Imperial City in the early spring, the 
emperor proceeded to Jerusalem, taking with him the venerable and life 
giving Cross so as to offer thanks to God. When he had come to Tiberias, 
the Christians there accused a certain man called Benjamin of oppressing 
them. For he was very rich and received the emperor and his army. The 
emperor censured him, saying: 'For what reason do you oppress the 
Christians? ' He replied, 'Because they are
458

enemies of my faith.' For he was a Jew. Then the emperor instructed 
him and, after converting him, had him baptized in the house of 
Eustathios of Neapolis, a Christian who also received the emperor.
  On entering Jerusalem, the emperor reinstated the patriarch 
Zacharias and restored the venerable and life giving Cross to its 
proper place. After giving many thanks to God, he drove the Jews 
out of the Holy City and ordered that they should not have the right 
to come within three miles of the Holy City. And when he had 
reached Edessa, he restored the church to the orthodox: for, since the 
329 days of Chosroes, it had been held by the Nestorians. And when he 
came to Hierapolis, he was informed that Siroes, the emperor of the 
Persians, had died and that Adeser, his son, had succeeded to the 
empire of Persia. After the latter had ruled seven months, 
Sarbarazas rose up against him and, having smitten him, ruled over 
Persia for two months. But the Persians killed him and appointed 
queen the daughter of Chosroes, Borane, who ruled the Persian 
kingdom for seven months. She was succeeded by Hormisdas, who 
was driven out by the Saracens, and so the kingdom of Persia has 
remained under Arab sway to the present time.

4
5
9

AM 6121 (AD 628/9)
Year of the divine Incarnation 621
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 20th year 
Hormisdas, emperor of the Persians (11 years), 1st year Sergius, 
bishop of Constantinople (29 years), 21st year Zacharias, bishop of 
Jerusalem (22 years), 21st year George, bishop of Alexandria (14 
years), 11th year
In this year, while the emperor Herakleios was at Hierapolis, the patriarch of 
the Jacobites, Athanasios, came to him. This skillful and wicked man, who 
was filled with the cunning that is native to Syrians, took up with the emperor 
a discussion about religion, and Herakleios promised him that if he accepted 
the Council of Chalcedon, he would make him patriarch of Antioch. So he 
pretended to accept the council and confessed the two natures that are united in 
Christ; and he also enquired of the emperor concerning the energy and the wills, 
namely how these should be defined in Christ, double or single. The emperor 
was disconcerted by this novel language and wrote to Sergius, bishop of 
Constantinople he also called in Kyros, bishop of Phasis, whom he questioned 
and found him
460


agreeing with Sergius on the one will and the one energy. For Sergius, 
being himself of Syrian origin, the son of Jacobite parents, confessed 
330
and propounded in writing one natural will and one energy in Christ. 
The emperor, being satisfied with the views of these two men, found 
that Athanasios, too, was in agreement with them. For the latter knew 
that if only one energy was recognized, one nature would thereby be 
acknowledged. Being assured in this matter, the emperor wrote the 
opinion of the two men to John, Pope of Rome, but the latter did not 
accept their heresy. And when George of Alexandria had died, Kyros 
was sent to be bishop of Alexandria. He joined forces with Theodore, 
bishop of Pharan, and made that union writ in water, they, too, setting 
down one natural energy in Christ. These matters having followed 
such a course, the Council of Chalcedon and the catholic faith fell into 
great disrespect. For the Jacobites and the Theodosians boasted, 
saying: 'It is not we who have communicated with Chalcedon, but 
rather Chalcedon with us by confessing one nature of Christ through 
the one energy.'! At this juncture Sophronios was ordained bishop of 
Jerusalem and, having convened the bishops under his authority, 
anathematized the Monothelete doctrine and sent synodal letters to 
Sergius of Constantinople and John of Rome. When Herakleios had 
heard of this, he felt ashamed; on the one hand, he did not wish to 
cancel his own actions, while on the other he could not suffer the 
reproach. At this time, then, in the belief of doing a great deed, he 
published the so called Edict, which prescribed that one should confess 
neither one nor two energies in Christ. When the sectaries of Severus 
had read this, they made a mockery of the catholic Church in taverns 
and baths, saying: 'The Chalcedonians, who formerly held the views of 
Nestorios, came to their senses and returned to the truth when they 
united with us in the one nature of Christ by way of the one energy. 
Now, however, repenting of what was right, they have lost on both 
counts by confessing neither one nor two energies in Christ.'
   After the death of Sergius, Pyrros succeeded him in the see of 
Constantinople and impiously confirmed the doctrines of Sergius and Kyros. 
When Herakleios had died and his son Constantine 331 became emperor, 
Pyrros along with Martina killed him by poison, and Heraklonas, Martina's 
son, was made emperor. But the Senate and the City drove out Pyrros for his 
impiety together with Martina and her son. And so Constans, Constantine's 
son, became emperor, while Paul, who was also a heretic, was ordained 
bishop of Constantinople. As for John, bishop of Rome, he convened a 
council of bishops and anathematized the Monothelete heresy. Likewise, 
various bishops of Africa, Byzakion, Numidia, and
461

Mauritania gathered together and anathematized the Monophysites. 
And when John of Rome had died, Theodore was ordained pope in 
his stead. Now, when Pyrros had come to Africa, he met the most 
holy father Maximus, who was venerable by reason of his monastic 
achievements, as well as the godly bishops who were there, who 
reproved and converted him and so sent him to Pope Theodore in 
Rome. He handed to the pope a declaration of orthodoxy and was 
received by him. But when he had departed from Rome and came to 
Ravenna, he returned to his own vomit like a dog. Upon learning 
this, Pope Theodore called together the full body of the Church and 
proceeded to the tomb of the foremost Apostle, where he asked for 
the holy chalice and, dripping some of Christ's life giving blood into 
the ink, signed with his own hand the condemnation of Pyrros and 
those who communicated with him. When Pyrros had arrived at 
Constantinople, Paul having died, the daring heretics once again 
installed Pyrros in the bishop's throne of Constantinople. After the 
death of Pope Theodore, the most holy Martin was appointed in 
Rome. And when Maximus had come to Rome from Africa and 
excited the zeal of Pope Martin, they convened a synod of 150 
bishops and anathematized Sergius, Pyrros, Kyros, and Paul, while 
clearly proclaiming the two wills and energies of Christ 332   our 
God this in the 9th year of Constans, grandson of Herakleios, 
indiction 8. On being informed of it, Constans was filled with anger 
and brought Martin and Maximus to Constantinople; and, after 
torturing them, he exiled them to Cherson and the Klimata. He also 
punished many of the western bishops. After Martin's exile, Agathon 
was ordained Pope of Rome, who, being moved by a divine zeal, 
also convened a holy synod and rejected the Monothelete heresy, 
while proclaiming the two wills and energies. And while the Church 
at that time was being troubled thus by emperors and impious 
priests, Amalek rose up in the desert, smiting us, the people of Christ, 
and there occurred the first terrible downfall of the Roman army, I 
mean the bloodshed at Gabithas, Hiermouchas, and Dathesmos. After 
this came the fall of Palestine, Caesarea and Jerusalem, then the 
Egyptian disaster, followed by the capture of the islands between the 
continents and of all the Roman territory, by the complete loss of the 
Roman army and navy at Phoinix, and the devastation of all 
Christian peoples and lands, which did not cease until the persecutor 
of the Church had been miserably slain in Sicily.

.
Year of the divine Incarnation 622
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (3I years), 21st year
463

Mouamed, leader of the Arabs (9 years), 9th year
 Sergius, bishop of Constantinople (29 years), 22nd year 
Zacharias, bishop of Jerusalem (22 years), 22nd year
 George, bishop of Alexandria (14 years), 1 2th year

	332	In this year died Mouamed, the leader and false prophet of the 
Saracens, after appointing his kinsman Aboubacharos (o his chieftainship. At the 
same time his repute spread abroad) and everyone was frightened. At the beginning 
of his advent the misguided Jews thought he was the Messiah who is awaited by 
them, so that some of their leaders joined him and accepted his religion while 
forsaking that of Moses, who saw God. Those who did so were ten in number, and 
they remained with him until his murder. But when they saw him eating camel 
meat, they realized that he was not the one they thought him to be, and were at a 
loss what to do; being afraid to abjure his religion, those wretched men taught him 
illicit things directed against us, Christians, and remained with him.
  I consider it necessary to give an account of this man's origin. He was descended 
from a very widespread tribe, that of Ishmael, son of Abraham; for Nizaros, 
descendant of Ishmael, is recognized as the father of them all. He begot two sons, 
Moudaros and Rabias. Moudaros begot Kourasos, Kaisos, Themimes, Asados, and 
others unknown. All of them dwelt in the Midianite desert and kept cattle, 
themselves living i n tents. There are also those farther away who are not of their 
tribe, but of that of lektan, the so called Amanites, that is Homerites. And some of 
them traded on their camels. Being destitute
.and an orphan, the aforesaid Mouamed decided to enter the service of a rich woman 
who was a relative of his, called Chadiga, as a hired
	333	worker with a view to trading by camel in Egypt and Palestine. Little 
by little he became bolder and ingratiated himself with that woman, who was a 
widow, took her as a wife, and gained possession of her camels and her substance. 
Whenever he came to Palestine he consorted with Jews and Christians and sought 
from them certain scriptural matters. He was also afflicted with epilepsy. When his 
wife became aware of this, she was greatly distressed, inasmuch as she, a 
noblewoman, had married a man such as he, who was not only poor, but also an 
epileptic. He tried deceitfully to placate her by saying, 'I keep seeing a vision of a 
certain angel called Gabriel, and being unable to bear his sight, I faint and fall 
down.' Now, she had a certain monk living there, a friend of hers (who had been 
exiled for his depraved doctrine), and she related everything to him, including the 
angel's name. Wishing to satisfy her, he said to her, 'He has spoken the truth, for 
this is the angel who is sent to all the prophets.' When she had heard the words of 
the
464


false monk, she was the first to believe in Mouamed and proclaimed 
to other women of her tribe that he was a prophet. Thus, the report 
spread from women to men, and first to Aboubacharos, whom he 
left as his successor. This heresy prevailed in the region of Ethribos, 
in the last resort by war: at first secretly, for ten years, and by war 
another ten, and openly nine. He taught his subjects that he who kills 
an enemy or is killed by an enemy goes to Paradise; and he said 
that this paradise was one of carnal eating and drinking and 
intercourse with women, and had a river of wine, honey, and milk, 
and that the women were not like the ones down here, but different 
ones, and that the intercourse was long lasting and the pleasure 
continuous; and other things full of profligacy and stupidity; also 
that men should feel sympathy for one another and help those who 
are wronged.
  In the same year, indiction 4, on 7 November, a son, David, was
	
335 born to Herakleios in the East. On the same day was born Herakleios, 
the son of the younger Herakleios, who was also Constantine, son of the elder 
Herakleios; and he was baptized by thepatriarch Sergius at Blachernai on 3 
November, indiction 5.




Year of the divine Incarnation 623 
Herakleios, 22nd year
Aboubacharos, leader of the Arabs (3 years), 1st year 
Sergius, 23rd year
Modestus, bishop of Jerusalem (2 years), 1st year 
George, 13th year
In this year the Persians rose up one against the other and fought an 
internecine war. At the same time the king of India sent gratulatory 
gifts to Herakleios on the occasion of his victory over Persia, 
namely pearls and a considerable number of precious stones.
  Mouamed, who had died earlier, had appointed four emirs to 
fight those members of the Arab nation who were Christian, and 
they came in front of a village called Mouchea, in which was 
stationed the vicarius Theodore, intending to fall upon the Arabs on 
the day when they sacrificed to their idols. The vicarius, on learning 
this from a certain Koraishite called Koutabas, who was in his pay, 
gathered all the soldiers of the desert guard and, after ascertaining 
from the Saracen the day and hour when they were intending to 
attack, himself attacked them at a village called Mothous, and killed 
three emirs and the bulk of their army. One emir, called Chaled, 
whom they call God's Sword, escaped. Now some of the 
neighbouring Arabs were receiving small payments from the 
emperors for guarding the approaches to the desert. At that time a 
certain eunuch arrived to distribute the wages of the soldiers, and 
when the Arabs came to receive their wages according to custom 
the eunuch drove them away, saying, 'The emperor can
336 barely pay his soldiers their wages, much less these dogs!' Distressed 
by this, the Arabs went over to their fellow tribesmen, and it was 
they that led them to the rich country of Gaza, which is the gateway 
to the desert in the direction of Mount Sinai.





Year of the divine Incarnation 624
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 23rd year 
Aboubacharos, leader of the Arabs (3 years), 2nd year Sergius, 
bishop of Constantinople (29 years), 24th year Modestus, 
bishop of Jerusalem (2 years), 2nd year George, bishop of 
Alexandria (14 years), 14th year
In this year Aboubacharos sent four generals who were conducted, as I said 
earlier, by the Arabs and so came and took Hera and the whole territory of 
Gaza. At length, Sergius arrived with some difficulty with a few soldiers 
from Caesarea in Palestine. He gave battle and was the first to be killed 
along with his soldiers, who were 300. Taking many captives and much 
booty, the Arabs returned home after their brilliant victory.
  At the same time an earthquake occurred in Palestine; and there 
appeared a sign in the heavens called dokites in the direction of the south, 
foreboding the Arab conquest. It remained for thirty days, moving from 
south to north, and was sword shaped.







Herakleios, 24th year 
Aboubacharos, 3rd year 
Sergius, 25th year
Sophronios, bishop of Jerusalem (3 years), 1st year 
Kyros, bishop of Alexandria (10 years), 1st year
In this year Aboubacharos died after being emir two and a half years, 
and Oumaros succeeded to the power. He (sent an expedition against
337 Arabia) and took the city of Bostra as well as other cities. And they 
advanced as far as Gabitha. Theodore, the brother of the emperor 
Herakleios, engaged them, but ·was defeated and came to the emperor 
at Edessa. The emperor appointed another commander called Baanes 
and sent Theodore the sakellarios at the head of a Roman army against 
the Arabs. When he came to Emesa, he met a multitude of Saracens 
whom he slew together with their emir, and drove the rest as far as 
Damascus; and he encamped there by the river Bardanesios. As for 
Herakleios, he abandoned Syrian despair and, taking the Holy Cross 
from Jerusalem, proceeded to Constantinople. He diverted Baanes and 
Theodore the sakellarios from Damascus to Emesa at the head of an 
army of 40,000, and they pursued the Arabs from Emesa to 
Damascus.







Year of the divine Incarnation 626
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 25th year 
Oumaros, leader of the Arabs (12 years), 1st year
Sergius, bishop of Constantinople (29 years), 26th year 
Sophronios, bishop of Jerusalem (3 years), 2nd year Kyros, 
bishop of Alexandria (10 years), 2nd year

In this year the Saracens, an enormous multitude of them, (setting out 
from) Arabia, made an expedition to the region of Damascus. 
469
When Baanes had learnt of this, he sent a message to the imperial 
sakellarios, asking the latter to come with his army to his help, seeing 
that the Arabs were very numerous. So the sakellarios joined Baanes
	338	and, setting forth from Emesa, they met the Arabs. Battle was given and, on the first day, which was a Tuesday, the 23rd of the month Loos, the men of the sakellarios were defeated. Now the soldiers of Baanes rebelled and proclaimed Baanes emperor, while they abjured 
Herakleios. Then the men of the sakellarios withdrew, and the Saracens, 
seizing this opportunity, joined battle. And as a south wind was blowing 
in the direction of the Romans, they could not face the enemy on 
account of the dust and were defeated. Casting themselves into the 
narrows of the river Hiermouchas, they all perished, the army of both 
generals numbering 40,000. Having won this brilliant victory, the 
Saracens came to Damascus and captured it as well as the country of 
Phoenicia, and they settled there and made an expedition against Egypt.
  (When Kyros, the bishop of Alexandria, had been informed of their 
onset, he took measures and, fearing their rapacity, concluded a treaty 
with them, promising that Egypt would pay them every year 200,000 
denarii and send them gold in respect of the appointed delay. By 
providing these sums for three years, he spared Egypt from disaster.) 
Now Kyros was accused before the emperor of giving to the Saracens 
the gold of Egypt. The emperor, in anger, sent a message to recall him 
and appointed a certain Manuel, an Armenian by origin, as augustalis. 
At the end of the yea r the Saracen tribute collectors came to receive the 
gold, but Man el drove them away empty handed, saying, 'I am not 
unarmed like Kyros that I should pay you tribute. Nay, I am armed.' 
When these men had departed, the Saracens immediately took up arms 
against Egypt and, after joining battle with Manuel, routed him. He took 
refuge in Alexandria with a few men. Then the Saracens imposed taxes 
on Egypt. When Herakleios had heard of these events, he dispatched 
Kyros to persuade the Saracens to depart from Egypt according to the 
former treaty. So Kyros went to the camp of the Saracens and offered 
many excuses, saying he was innocent of the transgression and urging 
them, if they so wished, to confirm the former
	339	accord by oath. The Saracens, however, were not satisfied and said to the bishop, 'Are you able to swallow that enormous pillar?' He replied, 'That is impossible.' To which they said, 'Nor is it possible for us to depart from Egypt at this time.'
470



AM 6127 (AD 634/5)
Year of the divine Incarnation 627
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 26th year Oumaros, 
leader of the Arabs (12 years), 2nd year Sergius, bishop of 
Constantinople (29 years), 27th year Sophronios, bishop of Jerusalem 
(3 years), 3rd year Kyros, bishop of Alexandria (10 years), 3rd year
I n this yea r Oumaros invaded Palestine and, after investing the Holy City for 
two years, took it by capitulation; for Sophronios, the bishop of Jerusalem, 
received a promise of immunity for the whole of Palestine. Oumaros entered 
the Holy City dressed in filthy garments of camel hair and, showing a devilish 
pretense, sought the Temple of the Jews the one built by Solomon that he 
might make it a place of worship for his own blasphemous religion. Seeing 
this, Sophronios said, 'Verily, this is the abomination of desolation standing 
in a holy place, as has been spoken through the prophet Daniel.' And with 
many tears the defender of piety bewailed the Christian people. While 
Oumaros was there, the patriarch begged him to receive from him a 
kerchief and a garment to put on, but he would not suffer to wear them. At 
length, he persuaded him to put them on until his clothes
471


were washed, and then he returned them to Sophronios and put on his own. 
Thereupon Sophronios died after adorning the Church of Jerusalem by word 
and deed and struggling against the Monothelete heresy of Herakleios and his 
companions Sergius and Pyrros.
  In the same year Oumaros sent lad to Syria and he made all of Syria 
subject to the Saracens.



340	(AM 6128, AD 635/6)
Herakleios, 27th year 
Oumaros, 3rd year Sergius, 
28th year Kyros, 4th year
I n this year John surnamed Kataias, the governor of Osrhoene, came to lad 
at Chalkis and covenanted to pay him every year 100,000 solidi on 
condition that he would not cross the Euphrates either peacefully or by force 
of arms as long as that amount of gold was paid to him. Thereupon John 
returned to Edessa and, having collected the annual tax, sent it to lad. When 
Herakleios had heard of this, he judged John to be guilty for having done 
such a thing without the emperor's knowledge; and, having recalled him, 
condemned him to exile. In his stead he appointed a certain general called 
Ptolemaios.

472
Herakleios, 28th year 
Oumaros, 4th year Sergios, 
29th year Kyros, 5th year
In this year the Arabs captured Antioch. Mauias was appointed by 
Oumaros commander and emir of all the territory under the Saracens, from 
Egypt to the Euphrates.

AM 6130 (AD 637/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 630
Herakleios, emperor of the Romans (31 years), 29th year Oumaros, 
leader of the Arabs (12 years), 5th year
Pyrros, bishop of Constantinople (3 years), 1st year 
Kyros, bishop of Alexandria (10 years), 6th year
In this year lad crossed the Euphrates with his whole army and reached 
Edessa. The Edessenes opened their gates and were given terms, including 
their territory, their military commander, and the Romans who were with 
him. The Saracens went on to Constantia, which they besieged and took by 
war and killed 300 Romans. From there they went on to Daras, which they 
also took by war and slew many people therein. I n this way lad captured all 
of Mesopotamia.



Herakleios, 30th year Oumaros, 6th year Pyrros, 2nd year Kyros, 7th year







473

341

   In this year the Saracens invaded Persia. They gave battle and utterly 
defeated the Persians, whom they subjugated entirely. Hormisdas, emperor 
of Persia, took to flight and, abandoning his palace, made for the innermost 
part of Persia. The Saracens on their part captured the daughters of 
Chosroes and all the royal equipment, and these were brought to Oumaros.
  At the same time Oumaros ordered a census to be made of all the 
inhabited territory under his rule. The census embraced people, beasts, 
and plants.




Herakleios, 31St year 
Oumaros, 7th year 
Pyrros, 3rd year Kyros, 
8th year
   In this year, in the month of March, indiction 14, the emperor 
Herakleios died of dropsy after a reign of 30 years and 10 months. After 
him, his son Constantine reigned 4 months and died after being poisoned 
by his stepmother Martina and the patriarch Pyrros. And so Heraklonas, 
Martina's son, became emperor together with his mother Martina.




Heraklonas, emperor of the Romans (6 months), 1st year Oumaros, 
8th year
474

Paul, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 1st year 
Kyros, 9th year
In this year Mauias took Caesarea in Palestine after seven years' siege 
and killed 7,000 Romans in it.
  In this year the Senate rejected Heraklonas together with his
mother Martina and Valentinus. They cut off Martina's tongue and the 
nose of Heraklonas and, having exiled them, placed on the throne 
Constans, son of Constantine and grandson of Herakleios, and he 
ruled twenty seven years. And after Pyrros had been evicted from his 
bishopric, Paul, the presbyter and oikonomos (of the   342 Church) 
was ordained patriarch of Constantinople in the month of October, 
indiction 15, and he remained bishop twelve years.


Year of the divine Incarnation 634
Constans, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 1st 
year Oumaros, leader of the Arabs (12 years), 9th year 
Paul, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 2nd year 
Kyros, bishop of Alexandria (10 years), 10st year
In this year Constans, after becoming emperor, addressed the Senate as 
follows: 'My father Constantine, who begot me, reigned for a 
considerable time in the lifetime of his father, that is my grandfather 
Herakleios, as co emperor and, after his death, for a very short time; 
for the envy of his stepmother Martina both cut off his fair hopes and 
deprived him of life, and this on account of Heraklonas, her illicit 
offspring by Herakleios. Your godly decision rightly cast her out from 
the imperial dignity along with her child lest the Roman Empire 
appeared to be ruled in an unlawful manner, as your
475



superlative Magnificence well knew. Wherefore I call on you to be my 
expert counselors regarding the common good of our subjects.' With 
these words he dismissed the Senate after bestowing (generous) gifts 
on them.





Constans, 2nd year 
Oumaros, 10th year 
Paul, 3rd year 
Kyros, 11th year
In this year Oumaros started to build the temple at Jerusalem, but the 
structure would not stand and kept falling down. When he enquired 
after the cause of this, the Jews said, 'If you do not remove the cross 
that is above the church on the Mount of Olives, the structure will not 
stand.' On this account the cross was removed from there, and thus 
their building was compacted. For this reason Christ's enemies took 
down many crosses.





Constans, 3rd year 
Oumaros, 11th year 
Paul, 4th year
Peter, bishop of Alexandria (10 years), 1st year
   In this year the patrician Valentinian rebelled against Constans. The 
emperor gave orders for him to be killed and transferred his army to 
his own allegiance.
476



  An eclipse of the sun occurred on the 5th of the month Dios, a Saturday, 
in the 9th hour.





Constans, 4th year 
Oumaros, 12th year Paul, 
5th year
Peter, 2nd year
   In this year Oumaros, the leader of the Saracens, was murdered on 
the 5th of the month Dios by a Persia n apostate who found him in prayer 
and pierced his stomach with a sword, thus depriving him of life after he 
had been emir twelve years. After him was appointed his kinsman 
Outhman, son of Phan.





Constans, 5th year
Outhman, leader of the Arabs (10 years), 1st year Paul, 
6th year
Peter, 3rd year
In this year Gregory, the patrician of Africa, raised a rebellion together with 
the Africans.




477



Year of the divine Incarnation 639
Constans emperor of the Romans (27 years) 6th year
Outhman leader of the Arabs (10 years), 2nd year
Paul, bishop of Constantinople (12 years) 7th year 
Peter, bishop of Alexandria (10 years) 4th year
	In this yea r a violent wind blew upon the earth. It uprooted many plants and tore 
up huge trees, roots and all, and threw down many columns of stylites.
	In the same year the Saracens invaded Africa and, after joining battle with the 
rebel Gregory, routed him, slew his followers, (and drove him out of Africa). Having 
laid a tribute on the Africans, they returned home.


[AM 6138, AD 645/6]

Constans 7th year
Outhman, 3rd year
Paul, 8th year 
Peter, 5th year

In this year Mauias invaded Cyprus by sea. He had 1,700 ships, and          344 took 
Constantia and the whole island, which he laid waste. On hearing, however, that the 
cubicularius Kakorizos was moving against him with a great Roman force, he sailed 
away to Arados and, after putting in his fleet, attempted to capture with the help of 
various engines the little town called Kastellos on that island. Meeting with no success, 
he sent to the inhabitants a certain bishop called Thomarichos to frighten them into 
abandoning the town, submitting to terms, and leaving the island. When the bishop had 
come in to meet them, they held him inside and did not yield to Mauias. The siege of 
Arados having thus proved fruitless, he returned to Damascus since winter had set in.
478





Constans, 8th year 
Outhman, 4th year 
Paul, 9th year Peter, 
6th year
In this year Mauias set out against Arados with a great armament and took 
it by capitulation on condition that its inhabitants would dwell wherever 
they wished. He burnt the town, destroyed its walls, and caused the island 
to be uninhabited to this day.
  In the same year a council was held in Rome by Pope Martin against the 
Monotheletes.




Constans, 9th year 
Outhman, 5th year Paul, 
10st year Peter, 7th 
year
I n this yea r the commander (Bousour) invaded Isauria with his Arabs. He 
slew and captured many men and returned with 5,000 prisoners. The 
emperor Constans sent a certain Prokopios as ambassador to Mauias to ask 
for peace, which was concluded for two years. Mauias was given Gregory, 
the son of Theodore, as a hostage at Damascus.


479


[AM 6143, AD 650/51]
Constans, 10th year 
Outhman, 6th year 
Paul, 11th year Peter, 
8th year
   In this year Pasagnathes, the patrician of Armenia, rebel led against 
the emperor and made a treaty with Mauias, to whom he handed his 
own son. On hearing of this, the emperor went as far as Caesarea of 
Cappadocia and, giving up all hope for Armenia, came back.





Year of the divine Incarnation 644
Constans, emperor of the Romans (27 years), 11th year 
Outhman, leader of the Arabs (10 years), 7th year
Paul, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 12th year Peter, 
bishop of Alexandria (10 years), 9th year
I.	344	In this year Gregory, the nephew of Herakleios, died at 
Helioupolis. His body was embalmed and brought to Constantinople.
  In the same year dust fell from the sky and great fear came upon 
men.






Constans, 12th year 
Outhman, 8th year
Paul dies and Pyrros is again reinstated for 4 months, 23 days; Peter, bishop of 
Constantinople, (12 years), 1st year 
Peter, 10th year
In this year Mauias took Rhodes and cast down the Colossus of Rhodes 
1,360 years after its erection. It was bought by a Jewish merchant of 
Edessa, who loaded the bronze on 900 camels.
  In the same year Abibos, the Arab general, invaded Armenia and, 
having encountered Maurianus, the Roman general, pursued him as far as 
the Caucasus mountains and devastated the country.





Constans, I3th year 
Outhman, 9th year Peter, 
2nd year

In this year Mauias commanded that a great naval armament 
should be made with a view to his fleet's sailing against 
Constantinople. The entire preparation was being made at Tripolis 
in Phoenicia. On seeing this, two Christ loving brothers, the sons 
of a trumpeter, who lived at Tripolis, were fired with a divine zeal 
and rushed to the city prison, where there was a multitude of 
Roman captives. They broke down the gates and, after liberating 
the captives, rushed to the emir of the city, whom they slew 
together with his suite and, having burnt all the equipment, sailed 
off to the Roman state. Even so, the preparation was not 
abandoned; and while Mauias made an expedition against Caesarea 
of Cappadocia, he appointed Aboulauar chief of the said 
shipbuilding. This man arrived at Phoinix (as it is called) in Lycia, 
where the emperor Constans lay with the Roman fleet, and engaged 
him in a
I.	345	sea battle. As the emperor was about to fight on sea, he 
saw in a dream that night that he was at Thessalonica. When he had 
awakened, he related his vision to an interpreter of dreams, who 
said, 'Would, 0 emperor, that you had not fallen asleep or seen a 
dream: for your being at Thessalonica is interpreted as "Give 
victory to another", (that is) victory will go to your enemy.' Now the 
emperor, who had taken no measures to draw up his battle line, 
ordered the Roman fleet to fight. And when the two sides engaged, 
the Romans were defeated and the sea was dyed with Roman 
blood. The emperor then put his robes on another man; and the 
aforesaid trumpeter's son leapt into the imperial ship and, 
snatching the emperor away, transferred him to another ship, thus 
saving him unexpectedly. This courageous man then stationed 
himself bravely on the imperial ship and killed many of the enemy 
before giving up his life on behalf of the emperor. The enemy 
surrounded him and held him in their midst, thinking he was the 
emperor; and, after he had slain many of them, they killed him, 
too, as the man who was wearing the imperial robes. Thus routed, 
the emperor escaped and, leaving everyone behind, sailed off to 
Constantinople.
482


[AM 6147, AD 654/5]
Constans, 14th year 
Outhman, 10st year 
Peter, 3rd year
In this year Outhman, the leader of the Arabs, was assassinated by the 
inhabitants of Ethribos after he had been emir ten years. Now discord 
prevailed among the Arabs: for those who dwelt in the desert wanted 
Ali, the nephew of Ali, Mouamed's son in law, whereas those who 
were in Syria and Egypt wanted Mauias. The latter prevailed and ruled 
twenty four years.




[AM 6148, AD 655/6]
Constans, 15th year
Mauias, leader of the Arabs (24 years), 1st year Peter, 
4th year
In this year Mauias took up arms against Ali. The two of them met 347   in 
the area of Barbalissos at Kaisarion near the Euphrates; and the men of 
Mauias, gaining the upper hand, captured the water [supply], while Ali's 
men were reduced to thirst and were deserting. Mauias did not wish to give 
battle and obtained victory without any toil.




Constans, 16th year Mauias, 
2nd year Peter, 5th year
In this year the emperor made an expedition against Sklavinia, and many he 
captured and subjected.
  In the same year took place the affair of St Maximus and his disciples, who 
had struggled on behalf of the true faith against the
Monotheletes. Being powerless to convert them to his heresy, Constans cut off 
the tongue of this divinely wise and most learned man as well as his right 
hand on account of his having written, together with his disciples, the 
Anastasii, many works against his impiety, [some of] which they composed in 
dialogue, as is known to lovers of leaning.





Constans, 17th year Mauias, 
3rd year Peter, 6th year
   I n this year peace was concluded between Romans and Arabs after Mauias had 
sent an embassy, because of the rebellion, offering that the Arabs should pay the 
Romans a daily tribute of 1,000 solidi, one horse, and one slave.
  In the same year there was a violent earthquake and buildings collapsed in 
Syria and Palestine in the month of Daisios, indiction 2.
484



  In the same year Martin, the most holy Pope of Rome, was exiled. He 
had struggled bravely for the truth and became a confessor. He died in 
the Klimata of the East.





Constans, 18th year 
Mauias, 4th year 
Peter, 7th year
This year Constans killed his own brother Theodosios.
  While the Arabs were at Sapphin, Ali (the one from Persia) was 
assassinated and Mauias became sole ruler. He established his kingly 
residence at Damascus and deposited there his treasure of money.





Constans, 19th year 
Mauias, 5th year 
Peter, 8th year
   This year there arose among the Arabs a heresy, that of the so called 
Charourgites. Mauias captured them, and he humiliated the men of 
Persia, while exalting those of Syria: the latter he called 348    lsamites 
and the former Herakites. The wages of the lsamites he raised to 200 
solidi, while those of the Hera kites he lowered to 30 solidi.

(AM 6153, AD 660/1)
Constans, 20th year 
Mauias, 6th year Peter, 
9th year
   This year. the emperor abandoned Constantinople and moved to 
Syracuse in Sicily, intending to transfer the imperial capital to Rome. 
He sent an order that his wife and his three sons, Constantine, 
Herakleios, and Tiberius, should be brought over, but the inhabitants of 
Byzantium did not let them go.





Constans 21st year 
Mauias, 7th year Peter, 
10st year
In this year the Arabs made an expedition against the Roman state. They 
made many captives and devastated many places.




Constans 22nd year 
Mauias, 8th year Peter, 
11th year
In this year part of Sicily was captured. The captives were settled at 
Damascus of their own free will.



Constans 23rd year 
Mauias, 9th year Peter, 
12th year
I n this year there occurred a confusion concerning the date of Lent. 
Abderachman, son of Chaled, invaded the Roma n state, wintered
in it, and devastated many lands. The Sklavinians joined him and went 
down with him to Syria, 5,000 of them, and were settled in the village 
Seleukobolos  in the region of Apameia.



Constans, 24th year 
Mauias, 10st year
Thomas, bishop of Constantinople (3 years), 1st year 
In this year Bousour invaded the Roman state. Thomarichos, bishop of 
Apameia, died and the bishop of Emesa was burnt.
487


(AM 6158, AD 665/6)
Constans, 25th year 
Mauias, 11th year 
Thomas, 2nd year
In this year Bousour once again invaded the Roman state and devastated 
the region of Hexapolis. Phadalas wintered there.


[AM 6159, AD 666/7)
Constans, 26th year 
Mauias, 12th year 
Thomas, 3rd year
    In this year the strategos of the Armeniacs, Saborios, who was of 
Persia n origin, rebelled against the emperor Constans and sent to
349 Mauias the commander Sergius, promising Mauias to subjugate the Roma n 
state if the latter would fight along with him against the emperor. When 
Constantine, the emperor's son, had learnt of this, he, too, sent an 
emissary to Mauias, namely the cubicularius Andrew, bearing gifts, so that 
Mauias should not co operate with the rebel. When Andrew had reached 
Damascus, he found that Sergius had anticipated him; as for Mauias, he 
pretended to be sympathetic to the emperor. Sergius was seated in front of 
Mauias, and when Andrew entered, Sergius, on seeing him, got up. 
Mauias upbraided Sergius, saying, 'Why were you afraid?' Sergius 
excused himself, saying he had done so out of ha bit. Turning to Andrew, 
Mauias asked, 'What are you seeking?' He replied, 'That you should give 
help against the rebel.' The other said, 'Both of you are my enemies. To 
the one that gives me more I will give help.' Then Andrew said to him, 
'Be not in doubt, 0
488



  Emir: a few things from an emperor are more advantageous to you than a 
great many from a rebel. However, do as you please.' Having said these things, 
Andrew fell silent. Mauias said, 'I am thinking it over'; and he bade both of them 
go out. Then Mauias summoned Sergius in private and said to him, 'You will no 
longer do obeisance to Andrew, since by so doing you will achieve nothing.'
  The next day Sergius anticipated Andrew and was seated in front of Mauias. When 
Andrew entered, he did not arise as on the previous day. Looking round at Sergius, 
Andrew cursed him mightily and threatened him, saying, 'If I remain alive, I will 
show you who I am.' Sergius replied, 'I am not getting up for you because you are 
neither a ma n nor a woman.' Mauias stopped both of them and said to Andrew, 
'undertake to give me as much as Sergius is giving me.' 'And how much is that?' 
asked Andrew. Mauias replied, 'To give to the Arabs the tax revenue.' Andrew said, 
'Woe to you, 0 Mauias! You are advising me to give you the body and keep the 
shadow. Make any agreement you wish with Sergius; for I will do no such thing. 
However, disregarding you, we shall have recourse to God, who has more power than 
you to defend the Roma ns, and we shall place our hopes in Him.' After
  these words he said to Mauias, 'Farewell.' And he departed from 350
  Damascus in the direction of Melitene along the road that Sergius, too, was 
about to travel because the rebel dwelt i n those parts. When he had reached 
Arabissos, he met the commander of the pass, who had not joined the rebel, and 
ordered him to be on the look out for Sergius when the latter would be returning, 
so as to hand him over to him. And he himself proceeded to Amnesia to await 
Sergius and reported to the emperor what had taken place. Now Sergius, after 
ma king a covenant with Mauias as he saw fit, took along the Arab general 
Phadalas with a force of barbarians to fight on the side of Saborios. Sergius was 
travelling in front of Phadalas and, as he was proceeding joyfully to meet 
Saborios, he fell into Andrew's trap in the passes. They seized him and brought 
him prisoner to Andrew. When Sergius saw Andrew, he fell at his feet, begging 
him to spare his life. But Andrew said to him, 'Are you the Sergius who took 
pride in his private parts in front of Mauias and called me effeminate? Behold, 
from now on your private parts will be of no benefit to you. Nay, they will 
cause your death.' Having said this, he ordered that Sergius' private parts should 
be cut off, and he hanged him on a gibbet.
  When Constantine had been informed of the arrival of Phadalas to assist 
Saborios, he sent the patrician Nikephoros with a Roma n force to oppose 
Saborios. Now Saborios was at Adrianoupolis and, when he had learnt that 
Nikephoros was marching against him, he trained himself for battle. It happened 
that one day he was going out of the
489

town on horseback as was his custom. When he came near the town 
gate, he struck his horse with his whip. The horse became restive 
and dashed his head against the gate, thus causing him to die 
miserably. In this way God granted victory to the emperor.
  So when Phadalas had come to the Hexapolis and learnt 
everything, he was in a quandary, and sent a message to Mauias, 
asking for help,
351   seeing that the Roma ns had healed their rift. Mauias sent him his 
son Izid with an armed force of numerous barbarians. The two of 
them came to Chalcedon and made many captives. They also took 
Amorion in Phrygia and, after leaving there a guard of 5,000 armed 
men, returned to Syria. When winter had fallen, the emperor sent the 
same cubicularius Andrew, and he reached Amorion at night when 
there was much snow. He and his men climbed on the wall with the 
help of planks and entered Amorion. They killed all the Arabs, all 
5,000 of them, and not one of them was left.
  The same winter there was a flood at Edessa and many men 
perished. A sign also appeared in the sky.


AM 6160 (AD 667/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 660
Constans, 27th year 
Mauias, 13th year
John, bishop of Constantinople (6 years), 1st year 
I n this yea r the emperor Constans was assassinated in Syracuse of 
Sicily, in a bath called Daphne. The reason for this was the following. 
After the murder of his brother Theodosios he was hated by the people 
of Byzantium, particularly because he had also brought ignominiously
49
0

to Constantinople Martin, the most holy Pope of Rome, and exiled 
him to the Klimata of Cherson; because he had cut off the tongue 
and hand of the most learned confessor Maximus, and had 
condemned many of the orthodox to torture, banishment, and 
confiscation of property for not accepting his heresy; because he had 
subjected to exile and torture the two Anastasii, who were disciples 
of Maximus, the confessor and martyr. For these reasons he was 
greatly hated by all; and it was out of fright that he intended to 
transfer the seat of the Empire to Rome. He accordingly wished to 
remove the empress and his three sons, but his design was thwarted 
by the cubicularius Andrew and Theodore of Koloneia. And so he 
spent six years in Sicily. And when he had entered the aforesaid 
bath, he was accompanied by a certain Andrew, son of Troilos, who 
was his attendant. As he began to smear himself with soap, Andrew 
picked up a
bucket, struck the emperor on the head and immediately escaped. 352
And as the emperor had been in the bath for a long time, those who 
were outside rushed in and found him dead. After burying him, 
they made emperor by constraint a certain Mizizios, an Armenian; 
for he was very comely and handsome. When Constantine had 
heard of his father's demise, he arrived in Sicily with a great fleet 
and, having captured Mizizios, put him to death together with his 
father's murderers. After establishing order in the West, he hastened 
to Constantinople and reigned over the Romans together with his 
brothers Tiberius and Herakleios.



(AM 6161, AD 668/9)
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 1st year 
Mauias, 14th year
John, 2nd year
I n this yea r Constantine became emperor together with his 
brothers. The Saracens invaded Africa and made, it is said, 80,000 
captives.
  Now the men of the Anatolic thema came to Chrysopolis, saying, 'We 
believe in the Trinity. Let us crown all three!' Constantine was
4
9
1


troubled, since he alone had been crowned, whereas his brothers had 
no dignity whatever. So he dispatched to them Theodore, the patrician 
of Koloneia, who deceived them with words of praise and took along 
their leaders that they might enter the City and confer with the Senate 
so as to carry out their wishes. Straight away the emperor impaled 
them across the water at Sykai. When they had seen this and been 
shamed, the Anatolics returned home in dejection. The emperor, for his 
part, cut off his brothers' noses.

353	AM 6162 (AD 669/70)
Year of the divine Incarnation 662
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 2nd year 
Mauias, leader of the Arabs (24 years), 15th year
John, bishop of Constantinople (6 years), 3rd year
In this year there was a severe cold, and many men as well as beasts 
suffered hardship. Phadalas wintered at Kyzikos.

(AM 6163, AD 670/71)
Constantine, 3rd year 
Mauias, 16th year 
John, 4th year
In this year Bousour made an expedition and, after taking many 
captives, returned home.
492



Constantine, 4th year 
Mauias, 17th year John, 
5th year
In this year, in the month of Dystros (March), a rain bow appeared in 
the sky, and all men shuddered and said it was the end of the world. In 
this year the deniers of Christ equipped a great fleet, and after they had 
sailed past Cilicia, Mouamed, son of Abdelas, wintered at Smyrna, while 
Kaisos 1 wintered in Cilicia and Lycia. plague occurred in Egypt. The 
emir Chale was also sent to assist them inasmuch as he was a competent 
and bold warrior. The aforesaid Constantine, on being informed of so 
great an expedition of God's enemies against Constantinople, built large 
biremes bearing cauldrons of fire and dromones equipped with siphons, 
and ordered them to be stationed at the Proclianesian harbour of 
Caesarius.




Constantine, 5th year 
Mauias, 18th year John, 
6th year
In this year the aforesaid fleet of God's enemies set sail and came to 
anchor in the region of Thrace, between the western point of the 
Hebdomon, that is the Magnaura, as it is called, and the eastern 
promontory, named Kyklobion. Every day there was a military 
engagement from morning until evening, between the brachialion of
the Golden Gate and the Kyklobion, with thrust and counter thrust.	354
493


The enemy kept this up from the month of April until September. Then, 
turning back, they went to Kyzikos, which they captured, and wintered 
there. And in the spring they set out and, in similar fashion, made war 
on sea against the Christians. After doing the same for seven years and 
being put to shame with the help of God and His Mother; having, 
furthermore, lost a multitude of warriors and had a great many wounded, 
they turned back with much sorrow. And as this fleet (which was to be 
sunk by God) put out to sea, it was overtaken by a wintry storm and the 
squalls of a hurricane in the area of Syllaion. It was dashed to pieces 
and perished entirely.
  Now Souphian, the younger son of Auph, joined battle with Florus, 
Petronas, and Cyprian, who were at the head of a Roman force, and 30,000 
Arabs were killed.
  At that time Kallinikos, an architect from Helioupolis in Syria, took 
refuge with the Romans and manufactured a naval fire with which he 
kindled the ships of the Arabs and burnt them with their crews. In this way 
the Romans came back in victory and acquired the naval fire.

494



Constantine, 6th year Mauias, 
19th year
Constantine, bishop of Constantinople (2 years), 1st year 
I n this year Abdelas, the son of Kais, and Phadalas wintered in Crete.

[AM 6167, AD 674/5]
Constantine, 7th year Mauias, 
20th year Constantine, 2nd year
I n this year a sign appeared in the sky on a Saturday.


(AM 6168, AD 675/6)
Constantine, 8th year 
Mauias 2rst year
Theodore, bishop of Constantinople (2 years), 1st year 
In this year there was a great plague of locusts in Syria and Mesopotamia.




AM 6169 [AD 676/7]
Year of the divine Incarnation 669
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 9th year Mauias, leader of the 
Arabs (24 years), 22nd year Theodore, bishop of Constantinople (2 years), 2nd 
year
495
355


In this year the Mardaites entered the Lebanon range and made 
themselves masters from the Black Mountain as far as the Holy City 
and captured the peaks of Lebanon. Many slaves, captives, and natives 
took refuge with them, so that in a short time they grew to many 
thousands. When Mauias and his advisers had learnt of this, they were 
much afraid, realizing that the Roman Empire was guarded by God. So 
he sent ambassadors to the emperor Constantine, asking for peace and 
promising to pay yearly tribute to the emperor. Upon receiving these 
ambassadors and hearing their request, the emperor dispatched with 
them to Syria the patrician John, surnamed Pitzigaudes, a man of ancient 
lineage in the state and possessed of much experience and excellent 
judgement, that he might parley suitably with the Arabs and conclude a 
treaty of peace. When this man had arrived in Syria, Mauias gathered a 
group of emirs and Korasenoi and received him with great honour. 
After exchanging many conciliatory speeches, they mutually agreed to 
draw up a written treaty of peace under oath, stipulating a yearly tribute 
of 3,000 [pieces] of gold, fifty captives, and fifty thoroughbred horses to 
be paid by the Hagarenes to the Roman state. These conditions having 
been approved by both sides for a duration of thirty years, complete 
peace prevailed between the Romans and the Arabs. After these two 
written treaties had been mutually sworn and exchanged, the oft
356		mentioned illustrious man returned to the emperor with many gifts.
  When the inhabitants of the West had learnt of this, namely the 
Chagan of the Avars as well as the kings, chieftains, and castaldi who 
lived beyond them, and the princes of the western nations, they sent 
ambassadors and gifts to the emperor, requesting that peace and 
friendship should be confirmed with them. The emperor acceded to 
their demands and ratified an imperial peace with them also. Thus great 
security prevailed in both East and West.




AM 6170 (AD 677/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 670 
Constantine, 10st year
Mauias 23rd year
George, bishop of Constantinople (6 years), 1st year 
In this year a severe earthquake occurred in Mesopotamia, as a result of 
which Batnai and the dome of the church of Edessa  fell down.
Mauias rebuilt the latter by the zeal of the Christians.



Constantine, 11th year 
Mauias, 24th year 
George, 2nd year
In this year Mauias, the Caliph of the Saracens, died on the 6th of the 
month Artemisios, indiction 1. He had been military commander 20 years 
and emir 24 years. His son lzid assumed power.
  In this year, too, the tribe of the Bulgars assailed Thrace. It is now 
necessary to relate the ancient history of the Ounnogoundour Bulgars 
and Kotragoi. On the northern, that is the far side of the Euxine Sea, 
is the so called Maeotid Lake into which flows a huge river called 
Atel, which comes down from the Ocean through the land of the 
Sarmatians. The Atel is joined by the river Tanais, which also rises 
from the Iberian Gates that are in the mountains of Caucasus. From 
the confluence of the Tanais and the Atel (it is above the 
aforementioned Maeotid Lake that the Atel splits off )
flows the river called Kouphis which discharges into the far end of	357
4
9
7

the Pontic Sea near Nekropela, by the promontory called Ram's 
Head. From the aforesaid lake is a stretch of sea like a river which 
joins the Euxine through the land of the Cimmerian Bosphoros, in 
which river are caught the so called mourzoulin  and similar fish. 
Now on the eastern side of the lake that lies above, in the direction 
of Phanagouria and of the Jews that live there, march a great many 
tribes; whereas, starting from the same lake in the direction of the 
river called Kouphis (where the Bulgarian fish called xyston is 
caught) is the old Great Bulgaria and the so called Kotragoi, who 
are of the same stock as the Bulgars.
  In the days of Constantine, who dwelt in the West, Krobatos, the 
chieftain of the aforesaid Bulgaria and of the Kotragoi, died leaving 
five sons, on whom he enjoined not to depart under any 
circumstances from their common life that they might prevail in every 
way and not be enslaved by another tribe. A short time after his 
demise, however, his five sons fell out and parted company, each 
with the host that was subject to him. The eldest son, called 
Batbaian, observed his father's command and has remained until 
this day in his ancestral land. His younger brother, called Kotragos, 
crossed the river Tanais and dwelt opposite his eldest brother. The 
fourth and fifth went over the river Istros, that is the Danube: the 
former became subject of the Chagan of the Avars in Avar 
Pannonia and remained there with his army, whereas the latter 
reached the Pentapolis, which is near Ravenna, and accepted 
allegiance to the Christian Empire. Coming after them, the third 
brother, called Asparouch, crossed the Danapris and Danastris 
(rivers that are farther north than the Danube) and, on reaching the 
Oglos, settled between the former and the latter, since he judged that 
place to be secure and impregnable on both sides: on the near side it 
is marshy, while on the far side it is encircled by the rivers. It thus 
provided ample security from enemies to this tribe that had been 
weakened by its division.
  When they had thus divided into five parts and been reduced to a 
paltry estate, the great nation of the Chazars issued forth from the 
inner depths of Berzilia, that is from the First Sarmatia, and 
conquered all the country beyond the sea as far as the Sea of Pontos; 
and they subjugated the eldest brother Batbaian, chieftain of the 
First Bulgaria, from whom they exact tribute to this day. Now, 
when the emperor Constantine had been informed that a foul and 
unclean tribe had settled beyond the Danube at the Oglos and was 
overrunning and laying waste the environs of the Danube, that is the 
country that is now in their possession, but was then in Christian 
hands, he was greatly distressed and ordered all the themata to cross 
over
498

to Thrace. He fitted out a fleet and moved against them by land and 
sea in an attempt to drive them away by force of arms; and he drew 
up his infantry on the land that faces the so called Oglos and the 
Danube, while he anchored his ships by the adjoining shore. When 
the Bulgars had seen the sudden arrival of this enormous armament, 
they despaired of their safety and took refuge in the aforementioned 
fastness, where they made themselves secure. For three or four days 
they did not dare come out of their fastness, nor did the Romans join 
battle on account of the marshes that lay before them. Perceiving, 
therefore, the sluggishness of the Romans, the foul tribe was revived 
and became bolder. Now the emperor developed an acute case of gout 
and was constrained to return to Mesembria together with five 
dromones and his retinue so as to have the use of a bath. He left
behind the commanders and the army, whom he ordered to make 359 
simulated attacks so as to draw the Bulgars out of their fastness and
so engage them in battle if they happened to come out; and if not, to 
besiege them and keep watch over the defenses. But the cavalrymen 
spread the rumour that the emperor was fleeing and, being seized by 
fear, they, too, fled, although no one was pursuing them. When the 
Bulgars saw this, they gave pursuit and put most of them to the sword 
and wounded many others. They chased them as far as the Danube, 
which they crossed and came to Varna, as it is called, near Odyssos 
and the inland territory that is there. They perceived that this place 
was very secure, being guarded at the rear by the river Danube, in 
front and on the sides by means of mountain passes and the Pantie 
Sea. Having, furthermore, subjugated the so called Seven Tribes of 
the neighbouring Sklavinian nations, they settled the Severeis from the 
forward mountain pass of Beregaba in the direction of the east, and 
the remaining six tribes, which were tributary to them, in the southern 
and western regions as far as the land of the Avars. Having thus 
extended their domains, they grew arrogant and began to attack and 
capture the forts and villages that belonged to the Roman state. Being 
under constraint, the emperor made peace with them and agreed to 
pay them yearly tribute. Thus the Romans were put to shame for their 
many sins.
  Both those who lived afar and those who lived near were 
astonished to hear that he who had subjugated everyone, those in the 
east and in the west, in the north and in the south, was vanquished by 
this foul and newly arisen tribe. But he believed that this had 
happened to the Christians by God's providence and made peace in 
the spirit of the Gospels; and until his death he remained undisturbed 
by all his enemies. His particular concern was to unite God's holy 
churches which had been everywhere divided from the days of the
49
9



emperor Herakleios, his great grandfather, and of the heretical Sergius 
and Pyrros, who had unworthily presided over the see of 
Constantinople and had taught one will and one energy in our Lord 
God and Saviour Jesus Christ. Being anxious to refute their evil
360 beliefs, the same most Christian emperor convened at Constantinople an 
ecumenical council of 289 bishops. He confirmed the doctrines 
previously established by the five earlier holy and ecumenical councils 
and joined in promulgating the pious dogma of the two wills and two 
energies at this holy and most accurate Sixth ecumenical Council, 
which was presided by the same most pious emperor Constantine and 
the pious bishops.

500





Year of the divine Incarnation 672 
Constantine, 12th year
Azid, leader of the Arabs ( 3 years), 1st year 
George, 3rd year
   In this year the holy and ecumenical Sixth Council of 289 holy 
bishops and fathers assembled at Constantinople at the behest of the pious 
emperor Constantine.




501

AM 6173 [AD 680/1)
Year of the divine Incarnation 673
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (17 years), 13th year Azid, 
leader of the Arabs ( 3 years), 2nd year
George, bishop of Constantinople (6 years), 4th year
In this year Constantine expelled from the imperial dignity his brothers, 
Herakleios and Tiberius, and reigned alone with his son Justinian.




Constantine, 14th year Azid, 
3rd year
George, 5th year
In this year the impostor Mouchtar rebelled and became master of Persia. He 
called himself a prophet. The Arabs were troubled.




Constantine, 15th year
Marouam, leader of the Arabs (1 year), 1st year George, 
6th year
In this year Izid died. The Arabs of Ethribos were troubled and rose up 
under the leadership of a certain Abdelas, son of Zouber. The Phoenicians 
and Palestinians gathered at Damascus and came as far as Gabitha to 
Asan, emir of Palestine. They laid their hands on Marouam, whom they 
appointed leader, and he was emir for nine months. When
502

he had died, his son Abimelech succeeded to the power and was 361   
emir  21 and a half years. He captured the rebels and slew Abdelas, son 
of Zouber, as well as Dadachos.





Constantine, 16th year
Abimelech, leader of the Arabs (22 years), 1st year 
Theodore, bishop of Constantinople for the second time (3 years), 1st 
year
In this year there was a famine and a great plague in Syria; and 
Abimelech assumed power over the nation. As the Mardaites were 
attacking the regions of the Lebanon and the plague was raging, the 
same Abimelech sent ambassadors to the emperor begging for the 
peace that had been requested in the days of Mauias and covenanted 
to provide as tribute the same 365,000 gold pieces, 365 slaves, and, 
likewise, 365 thorough bred horses.





Constantine, 17th year 
Abimelech, 2nd year 
Theodore, 2nd year
In this year the pious emperor Constantine died after a reign of 17 years 
and Justinian, his son, became emperor.
  It should be noted that those who maintain that the Summary 
Definitions of the Sixth Council (which they make much of) were issued 
four years later are chattering in vain. For, as in all other respects they 
are convicted of lying, so here, too, they are proved not to be speaking the 
truth. Indeed, an accurate chronological notation shows that the holy 
ecumenical Sixth Council, which was directed against the 
Monotheletes, took place in the 12th year of the reign of Constantine, 
descendant of Herakleios, in the year 6172 from Creation; and that the 
same Constantine reigned 5 years thereafter; and, after his death, his 
son Justinian reigned alone 10 years; and after Justinian had been 
expelled, Leontios ruled 3 years, and after Leontios, Tiberius (who was 
also Apsimaros) 7 years, and again the expelled Justinian 6 years. One 
may, therefore, determine from the published Definitions themselves 
that they were set forth in the second year of the latter reign of the same 
Justinian whose nose had been cut off, since the Third Definition 
contains the following,
362 word for word: 'We decree that those who have become entangled in 
two marriages and have remained enslaved to their sin until 5 January 
of the past 4th indiction of the year 6199, and have not chosen to 
come to their senses should be subjected to a canonical deposition.' 
And further down, 'Those who, after their ordination, have contracted 
one illegal marriage, that is presbyters, deacons, and sub deacons, and 
have already been debarred for a short time from the holy liturgy and 
been reproved, shall be reinstated in their respective ranks, but shall on 
no account be promoted to a higher rank. Their illicit union shall, of 
course, have been dissolved.' From this chronological indication it 
appears clearly that from the holy ecumenical Sixth Council until the 
publication of the Definitions there accrued 27 years. At the holy 
ecumenical council the patriarch of Constantinople was George, who 
was in the third year of his patriarchate, and after the council he 
remained patriarch another 3 years; and, after him, came the tenures of 
Theodore (3 years), Paul (7 years), Kallinikos (12 years), and Kyros (2 
years), so that, on the basis of the patriarchs, too, 27 years may be 
deduced. From the publication of the Definitions until the first year of 
Philippikos passed 5 years;
and in the first year of Philippikos took place an insane synod against the 
holy ecumenical Sixth Council; and after Kyros had been expelled in the 
6th year of his patriarchate, John was made patriarch of Constantinople; 
and both Andrew, metropolitan of Crete, and Germanus, metropolitan of 
Kyzikos, clearly signed and anathematized, along with everyone else at 
that time, the holy ecumenical Sixth Council that had been directed 
against the Monotheletes. And John having died 3 years later, Germanus 
was translated from Kyzikos and was made patriarch of Constantinople; 
and in the 13th year of the reign of Leo he was exiled and Anastasios was 
made patriarch, who ruled 24 years; and, after him, Constantine 12 years; 
Niketas 14; Paul 5; Tarasios 21; Nikephoros 8; Theodotos 6; Antony 16; 
and John, who divined with a basin, 6 years, 1month.

505



Year of the divine Incarnation 678
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (10 years), 1st year 
Abimelech, leader of the Arabs (22 years), 3rd year Theodore, 
bishop of Constantinople (3 years), 3rd year
In this year Abimelech sent emissaries to Justinian to ratify the peace, 
and it was concluded on these terms: that the emperor should remove 
the host of the Mardaites from the Lebanon and prevent their 
incursions; that Abimelech would give to the Romans every day 1,000 
gold pieces, a horse, and a slave; and that they would share in equal 
parts the tax revenue of Cyprus, Armenia, and Iberia. The emperor 
sent the magistrianus Paul to Abimelech in order to ratify the 
agreement, and a written guarantee was drawn up and witnessed. 
After being honourably rewarded, the magistrianus returned home. 
The emperor sent orders to receive the Mardaites, 12,000 of them, 
thereby injuring the Roman state: for all the cities along the border 
that are now inhabited by Arabs, from Mopsuestia to the Fourth 
Armenia, were then weak and uninhabited because of the assaults of 
the Mardaites. Since these have been repressed, the Roman country 
has been suffering terrible ills at the hands of the Arabs until this 
day.
  In the same year Abimelech sent Ziados, the brother of Mauias, to 
Persia against the impostor and usurper Mouchtar. And Ziados was
506

slain by Mouchtar. When Abimelech had heard of this, he came to 
Mesopotamia, and Saidos revolted against him. Turning back, he persuaded 
Saidos by agreement to open Damascus (which the latter had previously seized) 
and then treacherously assassinated him.li b
  Being a young man, about 16 years old, Ile and foolish in the 
administration of his affairs, Justinian sent the strategos Leontios with a 
Roman army to Armenia. He slew the Saracens that were there and 
subjugated Armenia to the Romans; likewise Iberia, Albania, Boukania, and 
Media, and, after imposing taxes on those countries, sent a great sum of 
money to the emperor. When Abimelech had been informed of this, he 
occupied Kerkesion and subjugated Theoupolis.



[AM 6179, AD 686/7)
Justinian, 2nd year 
Abimelech, 4th year
Paul, bishop of Constantinople (7 years), 1st year 
In this year there was a famine in Syria and many men migrated to the Roman 
country.
  The emperor went to Armenia and received there the Mardaites of 
Lebanon, thereby destroying a 'brazen wall'. He also broke the peace 
that had been concluded with the Bulgars, upsetting the formal treaty 
made by his own father, and ordered the cavalry themata to cross 
over to Thrace, intending to conquer the Bulgars and the 
Sklavinians.





Year of the divine Incarnation 680
Justinian, 3rd year 
Abimelech, 5th year Paul, 
2nd year
  In this year Justinian made an expedition against Sklavinia and Bulgaria. 
He pushed back for the time being the Bulgars who had come out to oppose 
him and, having advanced as far as Thessalonica, took a multitude of Slavs, 
some by war, while others went over to him. He made them cross by way of 
Abydos and settled them in the area of Opsikion. On his return, however, 
he was waylaid by the Bulgars in the narrow pass and was barely able to 
make his way, after suffering the slaughter of his army and many wounded.
  In the same year, too, Abdelas Zouber sent his own brother Mousabos 
against Mouktaros. After they had joined battle, Mouktaros was routed and 
fled to Syria. Mousabos overtook him and slew him. Abimelech made an 
expedition against Mousaros whom he vanquished and slew; and he 
subjugated all of Persia.


AM 6181 [AD 688/9)
Year of the divine Incarnation 681
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (10 years), 4th year
508


Abimelech, leader of the Arabs (22 years), 6th year Paul, 
bishop of Constantinople (7 years), 3rd year
In this year Abimelech sent Chagan to Mecca against Zouber, whom 
Chagan slew there. Chagan subjugated for Abimelech that country, 
which was opposed to him, and burnt their pagan temple together with 
the idol they worshipped. On this account Abimelech	365 made 
Chagan military governor of Persia. And so Persia and Mesopotamia 
and the Great Arabia of Ethribos submitted to
Abimelech and their internecine wars ceased.




Justinian, 5th year 
Abimelech, 7th year 
Paul, 4th year
In this year the Arab state was delivered from all wars and Abimelech 
dwelt in peace after having subjugated everybody.





Justinian, 6th year 
Abimelech, 8th year 
Paul, 5th year
In this year Justinian foolishly broke the peace with Abimelech; for he 
strove in his folly to move the population of the island of Cyprus and 
refused to accept the minted coin that had been sent by Abimelech 
because it was of a new kind that had never been made before. As the 
Cypriots were crossing, a multitude of them drowned or died of 
illness, and the remainder returned to Cyprus. When Abimelech had 
been informed of this, he diabolically feigned to be begging that 
peace should not be broken and that Justinian should accept his 
currency, seeing that the Arabs could not suffer the Roman imprint 
on their own currency; and inasmuch as the gold was paid by weight, 
the


Roma ns did not suffer any loss from the fact that the Arabs were minting 
new coin. Justinian mistook his plea as a sign of fear, not understanding 
that their concern was to stop the incursions of the Mardaites and then 
break the peace under a seemingly reasonable pretext; which, indeed, 
came to pass.
  Abimelech gave instructions for the rebuilding of the temple of Mecca 
and wanted to remove the columns of Holy Gethsemane. Now Sergius, 
son of Mansour, a good Christian, who was treasurer and stood on close 
terms with Abimelech, as well as his peer, Patricius surnamed Klausys, 
who was prominent among the Christians of Palestine, begged him not to 
do this, but to persuade Justinian, through their supplication, to send other 
columns instead of those; which, indeed, was done.


510





Justinian, 7th year 
Abimelech, 9th year Paul, 6th 
year
   In this year Justinian made a levy among the Slavs he had transplanted 
and raised an army of 30,000, whom he armed and named 'the Chosen 
People'. He appointed Neboulos to be their leader. Being confident in them, 
he wrote to the Arabs that he would not abide by the written peace treaty. 
So, taking along the Chosen People and all the cavalry themata, he 
advanced to Sebastopolis, which is by the sea. Now the Arabs feigned to be 
unwilling to break the peace, which they were obliged to do by the 
emperor's fault and rashness; and, having also armed themselves they came 
to Sebastopolis, protesting to the emperor that the mutual, agreements made 
under oath should not be dissolved; otherwise, God would judge the guilty 
and take revenge on them. Since the emperor would not even suffer to hear 
such things, but was pressing for battle, they unfolded the written peace 
treaty and hung it, instead of a standard, from a tall spear which they 
carried in front of them, and so rushed against the Romans under the 
leadership of Mouamed, and joined battle. At first the Arabs were defeated. 
Mouamed, however, won over the commander of the Slavs who were 
fighting on the Roman side by sending him a pouch full of gold pieces and, 
after deceiving him with many promises, persuaded him to join their side 
together with 201000 Slavs; and in this way he caused the Romans to flee. 
Thereupon Justinian killed the rest of them, together with their wives and 
children at a rocky place called Leukete near the gulf of Nicomedia.


511




Justinian, 8th year 
Abimelech, 10st year Paul, 
7th year
   I n this yea r Sabbatios, the patrician of Armenia, on being informed of the 
defeat of the Romans, delivered Armenia to the Arabs. Inner Persia, which is 
called Chorasan, also submitted to them. There arose there an impostor by 
the name of Sabinos, who killed many Arabs and nearly drowned Chaganos 
himself in a river.
  From that time on the Hagarenes were further emboldened and 
devastated the Roman country.




Year of the divine Incarnation 686
Justinian, emperor of the Romans ( 10 years), 9th year Abimelech, 
leader of the Arabs (22 years), 11th year Kallinikos, bishop of 
Constantinople (12 years), 1st year 
512
   In this year there occurred an eclipse of the sun on the 5th 
of the month Hyperberetaios, a Sunday, in the 3rd hour, so 
that some of the brighter stars became visible.
  Mouamed made an expedition against the Roma n country, 
taking along the Slav refugees who were acquainted with it, 
and made many prisoners. There was also a slaughter of pigs 
in Syria.
  As for Justinian, he busied himself with constructions in 
the palace. He built Justinian's Hall, as it is called, and the 
circuit wall of the palace. He appointed as supervisor of works, 
as lord and master his treasurer and chief eunuch, Stephen the 
Persian, a most bloodthirsty and cruel man who, not content 
with punishing the workmen pitilessly, used to stone them as 
well as their foremen. The emperor being absent, this wild 
beast even dared to have his mother, the Augusta Anastasia, 
whipped with a strap as if she were a child. Having done much 
evil in these respects as well as to the entire body of citizens, 
he caused the emperor to be hated. Furthermore, Justinian 
appointed as head of the State treasury a certain monk called 
Theodotos, who had previously been a hermit on the Thracian 
side of the Bosporus, a terrible and savage man who, quite 
gratuitously and without cause, inflicted demands, exactions 
and confiscations on many dignitaries of the state and 
prominent men, both among the administrators and the 
inhabitants of the City, whom he hanged from ropes, placing 
smoking straw beneath them. In addition, the prefect, by 
imperial command, threw many men in prison and caused them 
to be confined for several years. All these acts increased the 
people's hatred of the emperor.
Now the emperor demanded the patriarch Kallinikos that he
	3
68
should recite a prayer enabling him to demolish the church of 
the holy Mother of God ton metropolitou, which was near the 
palace, because he wished to set up a fountain at that spot and 
erect benches for the Blue faction that they might receive the 
emperor there. But the patriarch said, 'We do have a prayer 
for the construction of a church, but none has been handed 
down to us for the destruction of a church.' As the emperor 
went on pressing him and demanding a prayer at all cost, the 
patriarch said, 'Glory be to God who suffers everything, now 
and for ever and ever. Amen.' On hearing this, they destroyed 
the church and built the fountain. And they built the church 
ton metropolitou at the Petrion.


513




Justinian, 10th year 
Abimelech, 12th year 
Kallinikos, 2nd year
In this year Mouamed made an expedition against the Fourth Armenia and, 
after taking many captives, returned home.
  The same year Justinian was expelled from the imperial office in 
the following manner. He directed Stephen surnamed Rousios, the 
patrician and strategos, to kill at night the people of Constantinople, 
starting with the patriarch. Now the patrician Leontios, who had 
been strategos of the Anatolics and proved successful in war, and 
who later had spent three years in prison as the result of an 
accusation, was suddenly released and appointed strategos of Hellas. 
He was ordered to embark on three dromones and set out from the 
City the same day. That night, as he had put in at Julian's harbour 
(that of Sophia), next to the quarter of Mauros, in preparation for 
sailing away from the City, he was bidding farewell to the friends who 
came to see him. Among those who presented themselves were his 
close friends, Paul, monk of the monastery of Kallistratos, who was 
also an astronomer, and Gregory the Cappadocian, who had been 
a kleisourarch and later became monk and abbot of the monastery of 
Florus. These men had frequently visited him in prison and assured 
him that he would become Roman emperor. Now Leontios said to 
them, 'In prison you have made assurances to me concerning the
369 imperial office, and now my life is about to end in evil circumstances. 
For every hour of the day I shall expect death to be standing behind 
me.' They answered, 'If you do not hesitate, your goal will soon be 
accomplished. Do but hearken to us and follow us.' So Leontios 
took his men and as many arms as he had and went up very quietly 
to the Praetorium. They knocked on the gate and alleged that the 
emperor had come to make arrangements concerning some of
51
4

the inmates. This was announced to the prefect then in office, who came 
and opened the gates; whereupon he was seized by Leontios, beaten, and 
bound hand and foot. Leontios went in, opened the prison cells, and released 
the prisoners, a numerous band of brave men, most of them soldiers, who 
had been confined six or eight years. He gave them arms and went to the 
Forum with them, shouting, 'All Christians to St Sophia!' He also sent 
emissaries to each region with orders to proclaim the same call. The 
populace of the City was perturbed and hastily gathered in the atrium of the 
church. Leontios himself, together with his friends, the two monks, and 
some of the more prominent men that had come out of prison, went up to 
the Patriarchate to see the patriarch. Finding him equally perturbed by the 
order given to the patrician Stephen Rousios, he persuaded him to come 
down to the atrium and cry out, 'This is the day that the Lord hath made!' 
Then the whole multitude raised the shout, 'May Justinian's bones be dug 
up!' And so all the people rushed to the Hippodrome. When it was day, they 
brought Justinian out into the Hippodrome through the Sphendone and, after 
cutting off his nose and tongue, banished him to Cherson. The mob seized 
both the monk Theodotos, who was logothete of the genikon, and the 
sakellarios Stephen the Persian, and after tying ropes round their feet, 
dragged them through the main street to the Forum Bovis and burnt them 
there. And thus they proclaimed Leontios emperor.



(AM 6188, AD 695/6)
Leontios, emperor of the Romans ( 3 years), 1st year 
Abimelech, r 3th year
Kallinikos, 3rd year
In this year Leontios was made emperor and remained in peace on all sides.1
515





Leontios, 2nd year 
Abimelech, 14th year 
Kallinikos, 4th year
In this year Alidos made an expedition against the Roman country and, 
after taking many captives, returned home. Sergius, the patrician of 
Lazica, son of Barnoukios, raised a rebellion and made Lazica subject to 
the Arabs.



AM 6190 [AD 697/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 690
Leontios, 3rd year 
Abimelech, 15th year 
Kallinikos, 5th year
  In this year the Arabs made an expedition against Africa, which they 
occupied and garrisoned with their own army.1 When Leontios had 
been informed of this, he dispatched the patrician John, an able man, 
at the head of the entire Roman fleet. On reaching Carthage, this man 
opened by force of arms the chain of the harbour that is there, routed 
and expelled the enemy, liberated all the forts of Africa, and, after 
stationing his own garrison, reported these matters to the emperor and 
wintered there, awaiting the emperor's orders. But the Caliph, when he 
had heard these things, sent against him a numerous and more 
powerful fleet and forcibly drove out of the harbour the aforesaid John 
with his ships; and having entered within [the city] merely to make a 
tour, he encamped his army outside. The said John returned to the 
Roman country intending to obtain a bigger force from the emperor 
and came as far as Crete on his way to the
516



capital. But his soldiers, incited by their own officers and being 
unwilling to return to the capital (for they were gripped by fear and 
shame) turned to an evil plan: they abjured the emperor and elected in his 
stead Apsimaros, the drungarius of the Kibyraiots, who belonged to the 
squadron of Korykos, whom they renamed Tiberius. Now, as Leontios 
was cleansing the Neorion harbour4 at Constantinople, a bubonic plague 
fell upon the City and, in the course of four months, killed a multitude 
of people. Apsimaros arrived with his fleet and anchored opposite the 
City at Sykai. For some time the people of the City did not wish to betray 
Leontios, but 371 a betrayal was made through the single wall of the 
Blachernai by the provincial commanders who, under terrible oaths, had 
been entrusted over the altar table with the keys of the Land Walls: it 
was they who treacherously surrendered the City. When the marines of 
the fleet entered the citizens' houses, they stripped bare their 
inhabitants. As for Apsimaros, he cut off the nose of Leontios and 
ordered him to be kept under guard in the monastery of Dalmatos. The 
commanders who were friendly with the latter and ready to die on his 
behalf he exiled, after flogging them and confiscating their property. He 
appointed his own brother Herakleios, a most able man, sole commander 
of all the provincial cavalry themata and sent him to patrol the area of 
Cappadocia and of the passes and take charge of defence against the 
enemy.

517




Year of the divine Incarnation 691
Apsimaros, emperor of the Romans (7 years), 1st year Abimelech, 
leader of the Arabs (22 years), 16th year Kallinikos, bishop of 
Constantinople (12 years), 6th year
In this year Apsimaros acceded to the Empire. Abderachman revolted in 
Persia, of which he became master, and drove Chagan out of there.



Apsimaros, 2nd year 
Abimelech, 17th year 
Kallinikos, 7th year
In this year there was a great plague. Mouamed, at the head of a multitude of 
Arabs, made an expedition against Abderachman. When he reached Persia, he 
joined forces with Chagan. They made war on Abderachman, whom they 
killed, and, once again, Persia was handed over to Chagan.
  The Romans invaded Syria and came as far as Samosata. They laid waste 
the surrounding country and killed, it is said, as many as 200,000 Arabs. They 
took much booty and many Arab captives and, after instilling great fear in 
them, returned home.

518



Apsimaros, 3rd year Abimelech, 18th 
year Kallinikos, 8th year
In this year Abdelas made an expedition against the Roma n country. He besieged 
Taranton to no avail and returned home. He built up Mopsuestia and placed a 
guard therein.



Apsimaros, 4th year 
Abimelech, 19th year 
Kallinikos, 9th year
In this year Baanes, nicknamed Heptadaimon, subjugated the Fourth 
Armenia to the Arabs.
  Apsimaros exiled Philippikos, the son of the patrician Nikephoros, to 
Kephalonia because he was dreaming of becoming emperor; for he claimed 
to have seen in a dream that his head was shadowed by an eagle. When the 
emperor had heard this, he immediately banished him.





Apsimaros, 5th year Abimelech, 20th 
year Kallinikos, 10st year
In this year the Armenian chieftains rebelled against the Saracens and killed the 
Saracens who were in Armenia. Once more they made
519
372


contact with Apsimaros and brought the Roma ns into their country. 
Mouamed, however, made an expedition against them and killed many 
people. He subjugated Armenia to the Arabs, and as for the Armenia n 
chieftains, he gathered them i n one place and burnt them alive.
  The same year Azar made an expedition against Cilicia at the head 
of 10,000 men. The emperor's brother, Herakleios, met him and killed 
most of the enemy; the remainder he sent as captives to the emperor.





Apsimaros, 6th year 
Abimelech 21st year 
Kallinikos, 11th year
I n this year Azidos, son of Chonei, made an expedition against Cilicia 
and laid siege to the· fortress of Sision. The emperor's brother 
Herakleios fell on him and killed 12,000 Arabs in battle.
   Now, while Justinian was living at Cherson and proclaiming 
publicly that he would regain the Empire once again, the inhabitants of 
those parts took fright of the danger they were incurring on the 
emperor's part and decided either to kill him or to send him to the 
emperor. But he became aware of this and managed to escape; and 
having reached Daras, he requested an audience with the Chagan of the 
Chazars. On being informed of this, the latter received him with
373 great honour and gave him in marriage his own sister Theodora. After a 
short time he obtained permission to come down to Phanagouria, and 
there he lived with Theodora. When Apsimaros had heard of these 
matters, he wrote to the Chagan, promising him many gifts if the latter 
would send him Justinian alive; if not, at least his head. The Chagan 
yielded to this request and sent a guard to Justinian on the pretext that 
the latter should not fall victim to a plot made by his own countrymen. 
He also gave orders to Papatzys, his representative in those parts, and to 
Balgitzis,  commander of the Bosphoros, that they should kill Justinian 
when so instructed. These matters, however, were announced to 
Theodora by a servant of the Chagan's and so became known to 
Justinian, who invited
520


Papatzys to a private meeting and strangled him with a cord; and he did 
the same to the commander Balgitzis. Straight away he sent Theodora 
off to the land of the Chazars, while he himself secretly fled from 
Phanagouria and came down to Tomis.9 He found a fishing boat that was 
fitted out and boarded it; and having sailed past Assas, he came to 
Symbolon, which is close to Cherson. He sent word to Cherson in secret 
and took along Barasbakourios and the latter's brother, as well as 
Stephen, Moropaulos, and Theophilos; and, sailing off with them, he 
went past the lighthouse of Cherson. After he had thus sailed by 
Nekropela, the mouth of the Danapris and that of the Danastris, there 
arose a storm and all of them gave up hope of being saved. His servant 
Myakes said to him, 'Behold, 0 lord, we are about to die. Make a promise 
to God for your salvation, so that, if He gives you back your empire, 
you will not take revenge on any of your enemies.' And he answered in 
anger, 'If I spare one of them, may God drown me right here!' He came 
out of that storm unharmed and entered the river Danube. He then 
dispatched   374 Stephen to Terbelis, the lord of Bulgaria, so as to 
obtain help to regain his ancestral empire, and promised to give him many 
gifts and his own daughter as wife. The latter promised under oath to 
obey and cooperate in all respects and, after receiving him with honour, 
roused up the entire host of Bulgars and Slavs that were subject to 
him. The following year they armed themselves and came to the 
Imperial City.

521

AM 6197 (AD 704/5)
Year of the divine Incarnation 697
Apsimaros, emperor of the Romans (7 years), 7th year 
Abimelech, leader of the Arabs (22 years), 22nd year 
Kallinikos, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 12th year
In this year Abimelech, the leader of the Arabs, died and his son Oualid 
assumed power.
   In the same year Justinian reached the Imperial City together with 
Terbelis and the latter's Bulgars, and they encamped from the Charsian 
gate as far as the Blachernai. For three days they parleyed with the 
inhabitants of the City, who insulted them and refused any terms. 
Justinian, however, together with a few of his countrymen made his 
way in, without fighting, through the aqueduct and, after raising a shout 
of 'Dig up the bones!', he won the City. For a short time he established 
his residence in the palace of Blachernai.



Justinian, emperor of the Romans for the second time ( 6 years), 1st year
Oualid, leader of the Arabs (9 years), 1st year
Kyros, bishop of Constantinople (6 years), 1st year

522
In this year Justinian regained the Empire and, after giving many
gifts and imperial vessels to Terbelis, dismissed him in peace. 375   
Apsimaros abandoned the City and fled to Apollonias,  but was pursued, 
apprehended, and brought to Justinian. Herakleios, too, was brought in fetters 
from Thrace together with all the commanders who supported his side, and all 
of them were impaled on the walls. Justinian also sent emissaries to the 
interior and, after finding many of them who were either in office or out of 
office, likewise put them to death. As for Apsimaros and Leontios, he caused 
them to be paraded in chains through the whole City; and while games were 
being held in the Hippodrome and he himself was sitting on the throne, they 
were dragged publicly and thrown at his feet; and he trod on their necks until 
the end of the first race while the people cried, 'You have set your foot on the 
asp and the basilisk, and you have trodden on the lion and the serpent! He 
then sent them to the Kynegion to be beheaded. He blinded the patriarch 
Kallinikos and banished him to Rome; and in his stead he appointed Kyros, 
who had been a hermit on the island of Amastris, for having predicted to him 
his restoration to a second reign. He also destroyed a numberless multitude 
from both the civilian and military registers: some he threw into sacks and 
caused to die painfully in the sea; others he invited to lunch or to dinner and, 
as soon as they rose from the table, either impaled them or beheaded them. So 
everyone was seized by great fear.
  He also sent a fleet to bring his wife from the land of the Chazars 
and many ships sank together with their crews. When the Chagan had 
heard of this, he sent him this message: 'O fool, could you not have 
taken your wife on two or three ships without killing so great a 
multitude? Do you think that you are taking her, too, by war? Behold, a 
son has been born to you. Send your emissaries and take them away.' So 
he sent the cubicularius Theophylaktos and brought Theodora and her 
son Tiberius and crowned them; and they reigned jointly with him.

523





Justinian, 2nd year 
Oualid, 2nd year 
Kyros, 2nd year
John, bishop of Jerusalem (30 years), 2nd year
376 In this year Oualid seized the most holy cathedral of Damascus. The 
wretched man did this out of envy of the Christians, because this 
church was surpassingly beautiful. He also forbade that the registers of 
the public offices should be written in Greek; instead, they were to be 
expressed in Arabic, except for the numerals, because it is impossible 
in their language to write a u nit or a pair or a group of three or 8 or 3 
(?). For this reason they have Christian notaries until this day.

524


AM 6200 (AD 707/8)
Year of the divine Incarnation 700
Justinian, emperor of the Romans (6 years), 3rd year Oualid, 
leader of the Arabs (9 years), 3rd year
Kyros, bishop of Constantinople (6 years) 3rd year John, 
bishop of Jerusalem (30 years), 3rd year
   In this year Justinian broke the peace between the Romans and the 
Bulgars and, after ferrying the cavalry themata across to Thrace and 
fitting out a fleet, set out against Terbelis and his Bulgars. When he 
had reached Anchialos, he anchored his fleet in front of the fortress 
and commanded that the cavalry should encamp in the plains above, 
without guard or any suspicion. As the army scattered in the fields 
like sheep to collect hay, the Bulgarian spies saw from the mountains 
the senseless disposition of the Romans. Gathering together like wild 
beasts, they suddenly attacked and inflicted great losses on the Roman 
flock, taking many captives, horses, and arms in addition to those they 
killed. As for Justinian, he sought refuge in the fortress with the 
survivors and for three days kept the gates shut. On seeing the 
perseverance of the Bulgars, he was the first to cut the sinews of his 
horse and ordered the others to do the same. After setting up trophies 
on the walls, he embarked at night and stealthily sailed away, and so 
reached the City in shame.
 (AM 6201, AD 708/9)
Justinian, 4th year 
Oualid, 4th year 
Kyros, 4th year 
John, 4th year
   In this year Masalmas and Abas made an expedition against Tyana, 
incensed as they were on account of Maiouma's army that
	3
77
525

had been slain by Marianos; and, after laying siege to the town, they wintered 
there. The emperor sent against them two generals, namely Theodore 
Karteroukas and Theophylaktos Salibas with an army and a throng of 
peasant militia so as to fight and expel them. Rent by mutual dissensions, 
they made a disorderly attack and were routed; many thousands perished 
and many more were taken captive. The Arabs seized the camp equipment 
and the provisions and continued the siege until they had taken the city: for 
they had been short of food and were on the point of departing. On seeing 
this, the inhabitants of Tyana gave up hope. They accepted a promise of 
immunity and came out to the Arabs, leaving the city deserted until this very 
day. The Arabs did not keep their promise and drove some of them into the 
desert, keeping many others as slaves.




Year of the divine Incarnation 702
Justinian, 5th year 
Oualid, 5th year Kyros, 
5th year John, 5th year
In this year Abas made an expedition against the Roman country and, after 
taking many captives, returned home. He began to build Garis in the region 
of Helioupolis.

526


(AM 6203, AD 710/II)
Justinian, 6th year 
Oualid, 6th year 
Kyros, 6th year 
John, 6th year
In this year Outhman made an expedition against Cilicia and took many 
forts by capitulation. Kamachon and the surrounding country were 
betrayed to the Arabs.
  Motivated as he was by malice and remembering the conspiracy that 
had been made against him by the inhabitants of Cherson, the 
Bosporus and the other Klimata, Justinian sent to Cherson the patrician 
Mauros and the patrician Stephen surnamed Asmiktos. He fitted out a 
great fleet of every kind of ship: dromones, triremes, transports, 
fishing boats, and even chelandia, from contributions raised by the 
senators, artisans, ordinary people, and all the officials that lived in the 
City. He sent forth the fleet with orders to put to the sword all the 
inhabitants of those forts and leave no one alive; and he handed to them 
the spatharios Elias, who was to be appointed governor of Cherson. 
Having arrived at   378 Cherson and meeting with no resistance, 
they occupied the forts and put everyone to the sword, except for the 
children, whom they spared because of their age so as to make slaves 
of them. As for Toudounos, who was governor of Cherson and 
representative of the Chagan, and Zoilos, who was by descent First 
Citizen, and another forty prominent men of Cherson together with 
their families, they sent them prisoners to the emperor. Another seven 
distinguished men of Cherson they affixed to wooden spits and roasted 
them over the fire; and another twenty they bound with their arms 
behind their backs and, after tying them to the oar straps of a 
chelandion, filled it with stones and sank it in the sea. When Justinian 
had been informed of these things, he was incensed that the children 
had been spared and ordered the expedition to return with all speed. 
The fleet set sail in the month of October and was overtaken on the 
high sea by a storm at the rise of the star called Taurouras. Very nearly 
the whole fleet sank, and the men who perished in the shipwreck 
numbered 73,000. When Justinian had been informed of this, instead 
of being distressed, he was filled with joy. Being still possessed by 
this frenzy, he threatened with loud cries that he would send another 
fleet and mow everyone down to the ground, to the last man that pissed 
against the wall. The inhabitants of those forts heard these things and 
put themselves on guard; being obliged to tum against the emperor, they 
wrote to the Chagan in Chazaria asking for an army to defend them.
5
2
7


At this juncture even the spatharios Elias and Bardanes (who had been 
banished, but had then been recalled from Kephalonia and was with the 
fleet at Cherson) rose up in revolt. Justinian, when he had learnt of these 
things, dispatched, at the head of a few dromones, the patrician George 
surnamed the Syrian, who was logothete of the genikon, the prefect 
John, and Christopher, turmarch of the
379 Thrakesians, with 300 armed men. He handed to them Toudounos and 
Zoilos with instructions to reinstate them in their former positions at 
Cherson, to offer an apology to the Chagan through an ambassador, and 
to bring to him Elias and Bardanes. When these men had crossed over 
to Cherson, the inhabitants of the city of Cherson refused to treat with 
them. The next day the men of the city invited the leaders alone to 
come in and, after shutting the gates, put to the sword the logothete of 
the genikon and the prefect; as for Toudounos and Zoilos and the 
aforesaid turmarch together with the 300 soldiers, they handed them to 
the Chazars and sent them off to the Chagan. As Toudounos died on 
the way, the Chazars in his honour killed the turmarch along with the 
300 soldiers. Then the men of Cherson and of the other forts cursed 
Justinian and acclaimed as emperor Philippikos Bardanes, who was 
exiled there. When Justinian had learnt of this, he became even more 
enraged: he slaughtered the children of Elias in their mother's lap and 
obliged her to marry her own cook, who was an Indian. After which, 
he fitted out another fleet and dispatched the patrician Mauros, called 
Bessos, to whom he gave a battering ram and every other kind of 
siege engine, with instructions to destroy the walls of Cherson and the 
entire town, and not to leave a single soul alive there; furthermore, to 
inform him of his actions by means of frequent dispatches. This man, 
then, crossed the sea and threw down with the battering ram the tower 
called Kentenaresios as well as the adjoining tower called the Wild 
Boar; but as the Chazars arrived on the scene, a truce was made. Then 
Bardanes escaped and fled to the Chagan. Being reduced to inaction, 
the fleet did not dare return to the emperor; and so, they, too, cursed 
Justinian and proclaimed Bardanes emperor. They also petitioned the 
Chagan to hand Philippikos to them. The Chagan
380 insisted on an assurance that they would not betray him and that he would 
be paid one gold piece per man; to which they immediately agreed and 
so received Philippikos as their emperor. As the fleet was delayed and 
no dispatch had come, Justinian divined the cause and, taking along the 
contingent of Opsikion and part of the Thrakesians, advanced as far as 
Sinope to reconnoiter the situation at Cherson. While he was gathering 
intelligence concerning the regions across the sea, he saw the fleet 
sailing in the direction of
528



the City and, with a roar like a lion's, he, too, rushed to the City. 
Since Philippikos had overtaken him and seized the City, he came to 
Damatrys and encamped there with his men. Philippikos, for his part, 
immediately sent the patrician Mauros and the spatharios John, 
surnamed Strouthos, against Tiberius; he sent Elias, also with an armed 
band, against Justinian at Damatrys; and another man against 
Barasbakourios, who had taken to flight. Mauros proceeded to 
Blachernai together with the aforesaid Strouthos and found Tiberius 
grasping with one hand the little column of the altar table in the 
sanctuary of the Virgin Mary and, with the other, the wood of the cross, 
wearing, furthermore, phylacteries round his neck, while his 
grandmother Anastasia sat outside the bema. The latter fell at the feet 
of Mauros and begged him not to kill her grandson Tiberius since he 
had not done any improper deed. Even as she was holding this man's 
feet and imploring him with tears, Strouthos entered within the bema 
and seized him by force. He took away from him the wood of the cross 
and placed it on the altar, while the phylacteries he affixed to his own 
neck. Leading the boy to the pastern which is above the quarter of 
Kallinike, they stripped him and, stretching him out on the doorsill, cut 
his throat as if he were a sheep and ordered him to be buried in the 
church of the Holy Anargyroi, which is called that of Paulina. 
Barasbakourios, who was First Patrician and comes of Opsikion, was 
also arrested and killed. As for Elias, he went up to Damatrys with his 
soldiers and, after he had parleyed with the army that was there and 
given a promise of immunity to the men that were with Justinian, all 
of the latter scattered and forsook
Justinian, leaving him all alone as they joined the side of   381 
Philippikos. Then the aforesaid spatharios Elias rushed up to him 
angrily and, seizing him by the neck, cut off his head with the dagger 
he wore on his belt and sent it to Philippikos in the hands of the 
spatharios Romanus. Philippikos dispatched it in the care of the same 
Romanus to the countries of the West as far as Rome.
  Before he had become emperor, there was at the monastery of 
Kallistratos a clairvoyant and heretical monk. When once Philippikos 
had gone there, he said to him, 'You are destined for the empire.' The 
latter was troubled and the hermit said to him, 'If God so commands, 
why do you contradict him? This I say to you, that the Sixth Council 
was wrongly enacted. So, if you become emperor, do cast it down, 
and your reign is destined to be mighty and long.' Philippikos 
promised him under oath to do so. When Leontios had succeeded 
Justinian, Philippikos went up to the hermit. The latter said to him, 
'Do not hurry; it is yet to come.' And when Apsimaros became 
emperor, Philippikos went up to him again, and again the
5
2
9



latter said to him, 'Do not hurry. That thing awaits you.' Philippikos 
confided the secret to one of his friends, who announced it to Apsimaros. 
The latter had him flogged, tonsured, fettered, and exiled to Kephalonia. 
And when Justinian had become emperor for the second time, he recalled 
him. And when Philippikos had become emperor, he convened a bogus 
council of bishops in accordance with the injunction of the false monk, the 
hermit, and he cast down the holy Sixth ecumenical Council. The same 
year the foolish man was blinded. He lived a carefree life in the palace 
where he had found an abundance of money and splendid belongings that 
for many years had been collected by his predecessors as a result of 
confiscations and under various pretexts, especially by the aforesaid 
Justinian, and these he dissipated at random without taking any trouble. 
And whereas in his discourse he appeared to be eloquent and prudent, he 
was proved by his actions to be in every way incompetent, living as he did 
in an unseemly and incapable manner. He was also a heretic and an 
adulterer. He drove out of the Church the patriarch Kyros and appointed 
his accomplice and fellow heretic John.
530





Year of the divine Incarnation 704
Philippikos, emperor of the Romans (2 years), 1st year 
Oualid, leader of the Arabs (9 years), 7th year
531



John, bishop of Constantinople (3 years), 1st year
John, bishop of Jerusalem (30 years), 7th year
In this year Philippikos drove the Armenians out of his country and obliged 
them to settle in Melitene and the Fourth Armenia. Masalmas captured 
Amaseia and other fortified places and took many captives. George, the 
bishop of Apameia, was transferred to Martyropolis.
  Philippikos was not ashamed to make a furious attack on the holy Sixth 
ecumenical Council, hastening to subvert the divine doctrines that had been 
confirmed by it. He found allies in John, whom he made bishop of 
Constantinople after deposing its bishop Kyros, whom he confined in the 
monastery of the Chora; in Germanus who later occupied the see of 
Constantinople, but was then bishop of Kyzikos; Andrew, who was bishop of 
Crete; Nicholas who, from being a servant in charge of cups became a 
professor of medicine, and was at the time quaestor; Elpidios, deacon of the 
Great Church; Antiochos the chartophylax, and other men of the same ilk 
who anathematized in writing the holy Sixth Council.
  Meanwhile, the Bulgarians stealthily threw themselves upon the Bosporus 
by way of Philea and made great slaughter. They raided as far as the City and 
surprised many people who had gone across the water to celebrate opulent 
weddings and lavish luncheons with much silver plate and other equipment. 
They advanced as far as the Golden Gate and, after devastating all of Thrace, 
returned home unharmed with innumerable cattle. And likewise, the Arabs 
occupied Mistheia and other forts, and captured a great many families and 
cattle without number.


532




Philippikos, 2nd year 
Oualid, 8th year John, 
2nd year
John, 8th year	383
In this year Abas made an expedition against the Roman country and took 
Antioch in Pisidia, where he made many prisoners; and he returned home. 
There was a violent earthquake in Syria on the 28th of the month Peritios.
  Philippikos having meanwhile reigned two years, when the 
hippodrome games of the City's birthday had been celebrated and the 
Greens had won, the emperor decided to make on the Saturday of 
Pentecost an entry on horseback, to bathe in the public baths of 
Zeuxippos and to lunch with citizens of ancient lineage. While he was 
having his siesta, Rufus, protostrator of Opsikion, suddenly entered 
through the Golden Gate with the soldiers of the same thema that he 
had in Thrace (at the behest of the patrician George surnamed 
Bouraphos, who was comes of Opsikion, and of the patrician 
Theodore Myakios) and, having rushed into the palace, found 
Philippikos asleep. He seized him and carried him to the ornatorion of 
the Greens, where he blinded him, without anyone being aware of this. 
The next day, that is on Pentecost, the people gathered in the Great 
Church, and Artemios, the protoasekretis, was crowned emperor and 
renamed Anastasios. On Saturday after Pentecost Theodore Myakes 
was blinded, and the following Saturday George Bouraphos was also 
blinded, and they were exiled to Thessalonica.

533


AM 6206 [AD 713/14)
Year of the divine Incarnation 706
Artemios, emperor of the Romans (2 years), 1st year 
Oualid, leader of the Arabs (9 years), 9th year
John, bishop of Constantinople (3 years), 3rd year John, 
bishop of Jerusalem (30 years), 9th year
 In this year Masalmas made a raid into the Roman country and, after devastating 
Galatia, returned home with captives and much booty.
  Artemios, for his part, appointed very able strategoi of the 
cavalry themata and learned officials to fill civil posts, and so 
remained
secure. And as the Arabs were preparing an armament against the
384 Roman country by land and by sea, the emperor sent a number of 
dignitaries to Oualid in Syria on the pretext of negotiating peace, 
(among them) Daniel Sinopites, the patrician and prefect of the City, 
whom he instructed to inform himself thoroughly concerning the 
expedition against the Roman country and the enemy's strength. 
When this man had gone and come back, he reported to the emperor 
their great armament of land and sea forces. (Then the emperor 
commanded) that each man should store provisions for himself up to 
a period of three years, and anyone not having the means to do so 
should leave the City. He appointed overseers and started building 
dromones, (fire carrying) biremes (and great triremes). He restored 
the sea walls and likewise the land walls, and set up on the towers 
catapults for darts and stones and other engines. Having fortified the 
City as much as he was able, he stored a great quantity of produce in 
the imperial depots and so made himself safe.
5 
34




Artemios, 2nd year
Souleiman, leader of the Arabs (3 years), 1st year 
Germanus, bishop of Constantinople (15 years), 1st year 
John, 10st year
In this year Oualid died and Souleiman succeeded to the throne.
  In the same 2nd year of the reign of Artemios (who was also called 
Anastasios), on 11 August of the 13th indiction Germanus was 
transferred from the metropolitan see of Kyzikos to the see of 
Constantinople. On that occasion the following decree of translation 
was issued: 'By the choice and approbation of the reverend presbyters 
and deacons, of all the pious clergy, of the sacred Senate and the Christ 
loving people of this God guarded Imperial City, God's Grace, which 
always cures what is ailing and supplies what is wanting, hereby 
transfers Germanus, the most holy bishop of the
metropolis of Kyzikos to become bishop of this God guarded
	3
85 Imperial City. The present translation took place in the presence of 
Michael, the most holy presbyter and legate of the Apostolic See,
and of other priests and bishops, in the reign of Artemios.'
  On being informed that a Saracen fleet had sailed up from 
Alexandria to Phoinix with a view to cutting cypress wood, Artemios 
chose the swiftest vessels of his own fleet, manned them with soldiers 
of the Opsikion thema, and ordered that they should all assemble at 
Rhodes. He appointed as their commander and head John the deacon 
of the Great Church, nicknamed Papa Ioannakis, who was at that time 
logothete of the genikon. When this man had reached Rhodes and the 
fleet had assembled, he conferred with the officers with a view to 
their setting out for Phoinix so as to burn the timber and the armament 
of the Hagarenes that was there. While everyone else readily obeyed, 
the men of Opsikion refused to do so: they cursed the emperor and 
killed the deacon John with their swords. The fleet consequently 
dispersed and each squadron sailed off to its own station, while the 
evil doers moved against the Imperial City. When they had come to 
Adramytion, being leaderless, they found there a local man called 
Theodosios, who was a collector
5
3
5


of public taxes, an idle and ordinary fellow,6 whom they urged to 
become emperor. He ran away and hid on a mountain, but they found 
him and acclaimed him emperor by force.
  When Artemios had been informed of these things, he appointed 
men of his household to positions of command in the City and over 
the fleet he had built and, after arming them, departed himself to the 
city of Nicaea, where he made himself secure. Now the rebels, when 
they had arrived and stirred up the whole thema of Opsikion as well as 
the Gothograeci, apprehended a great number of big and small 
merchant vessels and came up to Chrysopolis by land and sea. The
386 City fleet was stationed at the harbour of St Mamas, and for six months 
they fought one another every day. When, however, the City fleet 
moved its moorings to the urban harbour of Neorion, Theodosios 
crossed over and occupied the region of Thrace. And, as a result of 
treachery, they took the City through the gate of the single wall of the 
Blachernai. The lawless soldiers of Opsikion and the Gothograeci 
raided by night the houses of the citizens and wrought great havoc 
without respect for anything. They arrested Artemios' officers who 
were in the City as well as Germanus, patriarch of Constantinople, and 
brought them to Nicaea as evidence before Artemios and his 
companions. When Artemios had seen them, he gave up hope and 
surrendered himself on obtaining a promise of immunity; and he 
assumed the habit of a monk. Theodosios kept him unharmed and 
exiled him to Thessalonica.
  Philippikos reigned 2 years 9 months, Artemios 1 year 3 months. Now 
Leo, who was strategos of the Anatolics, remained on the side of 
Artemios and did not submit to Theodosios. He enjoyed the support 
and cooperation of the Armenian Artabasdos,
strategos of the Armeniacs, to whom he promised to give his daughter in marriage, a 
promise he carried out.
AM 6208 [AD 715/16)
Year of the divine Incarnation 708
Theodosios, emperor of the Romans (1 year), 1st year 
Souleiman, leader of the Arabs (3 years), 2nd year Germanus, 
bishop of Constantinople (15 years), 2nd year John, bishop of 
Jerusalem (30 years), 11th year
In this year Masalmas made an expedition against Constantinople. 
He sent in front of him Souleiman with a land army and Oumaros by 
sea, while he himself followed them with much military equipment. 
When Souleiman and Bakcharos had reached Amorion, 387   they 
wrote the following to Leo, strategos of the Anatolics: 'We know 
that the Roman Empire befits you. Come, therefore, to us and let us 
confer about peace.' Souleiman observed that Amorion had no army 
and was in a state of enmity with the strategos because of the latter's 
support of Artemios; so he laid siege to it, intending to await 
Masalmas there. When he had drawn close to the city, the Saracens 
began to acclaim the strategos Leo as emperor and they urged those 
inside to do the same. On seeing that the Saracens were acclaiming 
him fervently, the people of Amorion acclaimed him too. Now the 
strategos knew that in the absence of regular soldiers and officers 
Amorion was about to be lost, so he sent this message to 
Souleiman: 'If you want me to come to you so as to confer about 
peace, why are you besieging the city?' The latter replied: 'Do but 
come, and I will depart.' So, after obtaining a promise from him, the 
strategos came before him with 300 horsemen. When the 
Hagarenes saw him, they put on their corselets and armour and met 
him; and he encamped half a mile away from their army. For three 
days he would come forward to them, and they negotiated about 
peace and their departing from the city. But they said: "Once you 
have ratified the peace, we shall depart." The strategos perceived, 
however, that they were intending to seize him, so he invited many 
of the prominent Saracens to dinner. While they were eating, 
Souleiman dispatched 31000 men in corselets to surround him and 
keep guard lest he escape. His watch became aware of this and 
reported to him, 'A multitude of mounted Saracens are standing 
round us.' One of these horsemen, called Zouber, came forward and, 
standing in front of him, said: 'A slave of ours has stolen much 
money and fled, and on his account we have mounted our horses.' 
But the strategos understood their crafty deceit and replied: 'Do not 
be troubled. No matter
	387	where he goes among our forts, we shall find him.' 
Distressed as he was, he managed to convey this message secretly 
through one of his men to the inhabitants of Amorion: 'For the fear 
of God, do not
surrender. For, behold, Masalmas is drawing near.' The bishop, too, 
came out to see him, and he told him the same. When Souleiman had 
been informed that the bishop had come out to see him, he sent this 
message to the strategos, namely, 'Give us the bishop.' But he, 
cornered as he was, hid the bishop and said to one of his men: 'While we 
are talking, put another garment on him and let him go into the 
mountains as if to fetch wood or water.' And as the Saracens were 
insisting about the bishop, the strategos said: 'He is not here. But go to 
the emir, and I shall come, too, and we shall discuss everything.' 
Thinking that when he went in to see the emir they would seize him in 
their midst, they let him go. Mounting horses, he and 200 of his men 
turned to the left as if going on a hunt. The Saracens who accompanied 
him asked, 'Where are you going?' He replied, 'I wish to move my camp 
to the meadows.' They said, 'Your intention is not a good one. We are 
not coming with you.' Then the strategos said to his men, 'After giving 
us their word, they wanted to seize us and, through us, to ruin the 
Christians. But they will not take any of the men or horses that are left 
to us.' And going ten miles, he encamped there. The next day he sent the 
domesticus of his grooms4 and declared to the Arabs: 'You gave me your 
word, yet intended to seize me by deceit. This is why I departed.' Now 
Masalmas had already gone over the mountain passes, but Souleiman 
was not aware of this. The emirs and the soldiers rose up against 
Souleiman, saying, 'Why are we investing the walls instead of raiding?' 
And, taking down their tents, they departed. Meanwhile the strategos 
introduced the turmarch Nikaias with 800 soldiers into Amorion and 
ejected most of the women and children. And he himself went off to 
Pisidia. 389   
     When Masalmas had come to Cappadocia, the Cappadocians 
despaired of their own safety and went out towards him begging him to 
take them. But Masalmas, hearing of the hostility which the emperor 
Theodosios felt towards the strategos, wished to entrap the latter and 
make peace with him, and through him to subjugate the Roman country. 
So he said to them, 'Do you not belong to the strategos?' They 
answered 'Yes.' 'And will you do whatever he does?' 'Yes.' Then he said 
to them, 'Go back to your forts and have no fear of anyone.' And he 
instructed his army not to raid in any of the provinces of the strategos. 
When he had heard of this, the strategos realized that Souleiman would 
report to Masalmas that he had left him and departed, and so he sent a 
letter to Masalmas, saying, 'I wanted to come in your presence. But 
Souleiman, when I had gone towards him, intended to seize me, and 
now I am afraid of coming to you.' Then Masalmas said to the servant 
of the strategos, 'I know that the strategos is tricking me so that I 
should not devastate at all
539


his provinces.' The servant of the strategos replied to him, 'This is 
not so. He has written you truthfully.' Then the other one asked, 'How 
is Amorion disposed towards him? ' Reply: 'Well, and in subjection to 
him.' Masalmas became angry and insulted him, saying, 'Why are you 
lying?' He answered, 'It is as I have said. And he has placed his 
soldiers and a turmarch therein, and removed the surplus families.' 
Masalmas was greatly grieved by this and drove him out in anger; for 
he was intending to take Amorion in the summer and await his fleet, 
and then go down to Asia and winter there. So he summoned once 
more the servant of the strategos and interrogated him a second time. 
The latter told him under oath, 'Everything I have said to you is true. 
Indeed, 1,000 soldiers have entered there with their turmarch. And he 
has removed thence all the goods of the inhabitants and the indigent 
families.' On hearing this, Masalmas wrote to the strategos, 'Come into 
my presence, and I 390   shall make peace with you and do 
everything as you wish.' Observing that Masalmas had approached 
Masalaios and in another five days would march past his provinces, the 
strategos sent two consuls to him with this message, 'I have received 
your letter and approved your intention. Behold, I am coming to you. 
But, as you know, I am a strategos and I shall have money, silver and 
soldiers in my train. Send me your word concerning each one of these. 
And if my affairs are settled as I desire them from you, well and good; if 
not, I shall, at least, return unharmed and unmolested.' When the consuls 
reached him at Theodosiana, Masalmas said to them, 'I knew that your 
strategos was tricking me.' But they replied, 'Not at all.' Then he 
delivered the promise they had sought and dismissed them. So, while 
the consuls were proceeding to the strategos with the signed promise, 
Masalmas, being at the head of a great multitude and unable to stop 
anywhere, arrived at Akroinos. Now the strategos, on seeing that he had 
gone beyond his provinces, went off to Nicomedia. He chanced upon 
the son of Theodosios and apprehended him together with the entire 
imperial household and the palace dignitaries. Masalmas, for his part, 
went down to Asia and wintered there, and Oumaros did so in Cilicia.
  Now the strategos, taking along the emperor's son, held counsel 
with his companions and came to Chrysopolis. On being informed of 
these events, Theodosios conferred with the patriarch Germanus and 
the Senate, and received through the same patriarch a promise of his 
immunity from Leo (and an undertaking that he would pre­ serve the 
Church undisturbed), and so he handed the Empire to him. Theodosios 
and his son became clergymen and spent the remainder of their lives 
in peace. 
540
  Now Masalmas came to Pergamon, which he besieged and, by 
God's dispensation, captured because of the Devil's machinations. For, 
at the instigation of a magician, the inhabitants of the city produced a 
pregnant woman who was about to give birth and cut her up. And 
after removing her infant and cooking it in a pot, all those who were 
intending to fight dipped the sleeve of their right arm 391   in this 
detestable sacrifice, and for this reason they were delivered to the 
enemy.

AM 6209 (AD 716/17)
Year of the divine Incarnation 709
Leo the Isaurian, emperor of the Romans (14 years), 1st 
year Souleiman, 3rd year
541

Germanus, 3rd year 
John, 12th year

In this year Leo, whose place of origin was Germanikeia, in reality 
Isauria, became emperor. Justinian, during his first reign, removed 
him, together with his parents, to Mesembria in Thrace. And when 
Justinian became emperor for the second time and was marching 
down with the Bulgarians, Leo met him and gave him a present of 
500 sheep. Thus conciliated, Justinian immediately named him 
spatharios and had him as a close friend. Certain envious people 
accused him of seeking the crown, but were shamefully exposed as 
slanderers after an inquiry had been made into this matter. Yet, from 
that time on, this rumour began to be spread about by many people. 
Now Justinian did not wish to harm him openly, but conceived some 
sort of aversion towards him and dispatched him to Alania with a 
sum of money so as to rouse up the Alans against Abasgia: for the 
Saracens were in control of Abasgia, Lazica, and Iberia. When he 
had gone to Lazica, he deposited the money at Phasis and, taking a 
few natives with him, proceeded to Apsilia, crossed the Caucasian 
mountains, and reached Alania. Wishing to destroy him, Justinian 
sent instructions for the money to be removed from Phasis. The 
Alans, however, received the spatharios with great honour and, 
obeying his words, invaded and captured Abasgia. Now the lord of 
the Abasgians sent this message to the Alans: 'As I found out, 
Justinian did not have a bigger liar than this man whom he might 
have sent to rouse you up against us, your neighbors. He lied to 
you even about the promise of money; for Justinian has given 
instructions for its removal. Surrender this man to us and we shall 
pay you 3 000 gold pieces lest our ancient friendship
392   be broken.' The Alans replied: 'We have obeyed this man not on 
account of money, but because of our friendship with the emperor.' 
Once again the Abasgians sent emissaries to them, saying: 'Give us 
this man, and we shall pay you 6,000 gold pieces.' Now the Alans, 
wishing to reconnoiter the land of the Abasgians, agreed to receive 
the 6,ooo gold pieces and to surrender the spatharios. They 
confided everything to the spatharios and said to him: 'As you can 
see, the road leading to the Roman country is closed, and you have 
no means of going on your way. Let us rather deceive them by 
agreeing to surrender you, and we shall send some of our men to 
accompany them. Thus we shall gain a knowledge of their 
mountain passes so as to raid and destroy their country and 
perform what is pleasing to you.' So the Alan emissaries went to 
Abasgia and, after agreeing to surrender the spatharios, they 
received many gifts. And once again [the
542

Abasgians] sent a great number of emissaries with the sum of gold so 
as to take possession of the spatharios. Now the Alans said to the 
spatharios: 'These men, as we have said before, have come in order 
to take you, and Abasgia awaits you. As we draw near to them, there 
is a constant stream of merchants going to their country. So, lest our 
purpose be divulged, we shall surrender you openly. And as you 
move away, we shall secretly send men after you, and we shall kill 
the Abasgians and hide you until our army is gathered and we are 
able to invade their country by stealth.' Which, indeed, came to pass. 
For the Abasgian emissaries took possession of the spatharios and 
his companions and, after tying them up, they went off. Now the 
Alans under their lord Itaxes, overtook them from behind and killed 
the Abasgians, while they concealed the spatharios. And, raising an 
army, [Itaxes] moved against Abasgia; entering unexpectedly through 
the mountain passes, he made many captives and caused
much destruction among the Abasgians. When Justinian had heard   393 of 
these matters, namely that his instructions had been carried out
even without money, he sent the following letter to the Abasgians: 'If 
you escort our spatharios and let him pass through your country 
without harm, we shall forgive you all your transgressions.' They 
gladly received this letter and, once again, sent emissaries to Alania 
saying: 'We shall give you our children as hostages if you give us the 
spatharios that we may send him on his way to Justinian.' But the 
spatharios would not agree to this, saying: 'God is able to open me a 
door that I may go out: for I shall not leave by way of Abasgia.'
  Some time later an army of Romans and Armenians entered 
Lazica and were besieging Archaiopolis, but on hearing that the 
Saracens were coming, they departed. About 200 men split off [from the 
main army] and went looting in the region of Apsilia and the 
Caucasian mountains. When the Saracens reached Lazica, the army of 
Romans and Armenians took to flight and returned to Phasis, while 
the 200 who had been left behind gave up hope and remained as 
robbers in the Caucasian mountains. The Alans, on being informed 
of this, thought that a multitude of Romans was in the Caucasian 
mountains, and they joyfully said to the spatharios: 'The Romans have 
drawn near. Go to them.' Taking fifty Alans along, the spatharios 
crossed in snow shoes the snowy mountains of Caucasus in the month 
of May and found the men. Joyfully he asked them: 'Where is the 
army?' They replied: 'It returned to the Roman country when the 
Saracens attacked. As for us, being unable to depart to the Roman 
country, we were making our way to Alania.' He said to them: 'What 
shall we do now?' They replied: 'It is impossible for us to traverse this 
country.' But the spatharios said: 'It is not
5
4
3



possible to make our way out by any other route.' Now there was a fort 
there called Sideron, whose warden, a man named Pharasmanios, was 
subject to the Saracens and at peace with the Armenians. The 
spatharios sent word to him, saying: 'Since you are at peace with the 
Armenians, make peace with me too, and become
	394	subject to the emperor. Help us go down to the sea and cross 
over to Trebizond.' But since the warden chose not to do so, the 
spatharios sent some of his men, including some Armenians, and 
instructed
them to set an ambush, [saying]: 'When they go out to work [in the 
fields capture as many of them as you can, and take hold of the gates 
from the outside until we too get there.' So they went off and set the 
ambush; and when the people went out to work, they suddenly fell 
upon them, took many captives and seized the gates. Since 
Pharasmanios had remained in the fort with a few men, the spatharios, 
on reaching the spot, spoke to him that he might peacefully let them 
in, but Pharasmanios was unwilling to do so and made war. The fort, 
however, was strong and they could not take it. Now Marinus, the 
chief of the Apsilians, was seized by fear when he had been informed 
that the fort was under siege, thinking that the spatharios had a big 
army with him. So, taking 300 men along, he went to the spatharios 
and said: 'I will accompany you safely as far as the coast.' 
Pharasmanios, for his part, on seeing his difficult position, said to the 
spatharios: 'Take my son as hostage, and I undertake to serve the 
Empire.' The other took the boy and said: 'What kind of emperor's 
servant do you call yourself when you speak to us while remaining 
locked up? There is no question of our departing until we take the 
fort.' Then Pharasmanios says, 'Give me your word.' The spatharios 
swore not to harm him and to enter the fort with no more than thirty 
men. But when the other had not observed the agreement, he 
instructed the thirty men that were being let in along with him, saying: 
'As you go in, take hold of the gates and let everyone enter.' When 
this had taken place, he ordered that the fort should be set on fire; and 
as a great conflagration flared up, the families [of the inhabitants] went 
out seizing whatever possessions they could carry. Remaining there 
another three days [the spatharios] demolished the walls down to the 
ground, and then set out on his downward journey to Apsilia together 
with Marinus, the local chief, and was
	395	received with great honour by the Apsilians. From there he 
went down to the coast and crossed over to [the emperor] Justinian. 
After Justinian had been slain and Philippikos had been blinded, 
Artemios became emperor and appointed him strategos of the 
Anatolics. And when Artemios had been ousted and Theodosius was 
made emperor, while the Roman state was in confusion because of 
barbarian invasion
544


   
   Justinians murders and the evil deeds of Philippikos the aforesaid Leo took 
the side of Artemios and opposed Theodosios. He had the agreement and 
cooperation of Artabasdos strategos of the Armeniacs whom after he had become 
emperor he made his son in law through marriage to his daughter Anna and also 
promoted him to the rank of curopalates. Now Masalmas after he had wintered 
in Asia was awaiting Leos promises. But when he had received nothing from 
Leo and realized that he had been tricked he moved to Abydos crossed over to 
Thrace with a considerable army and advanced towards the Imperial City. He 
also wrote to the Caliph Souleiman that the latter should come with the fleet that 
had been fitted out in advance. After devastating the Thracian forts Masalmas 
laid siege to the City on 15 August. [The Arabs] fenced the land walls all round 
by digging a wide trench and building above it a breast high parapet of dry stone. 
On September of the 1st indiction Christs enemy Souleiman sailed up with his 
fleet and his emirs. He had enormous ships military transports and dromones to 
the number of 1,800. He put in between the Magnaura and the Kyklobion. Two 
days later a south wind blew and 396   they set out from there and sailed past 
the City. Some of them crossed over to [the suburbs] of Eutropios and 
Anthemios while others put in on the Thracian side from the fort of Galata all the 
way to the Kleidion. Since the big ships were heavily laden and moved slowly 
some twenty transports protected the rear each one of them guarded by a 
hundred men clad in corselets. These found themselves be calmed in the midst of 
the current and when a slight breeze blew down the straits they were pushed 
back. Straight away the pious emperor sent against them the fire bearing ships 
from the Acropolis and, with divine help set them on fire so that some of them 
were cast up burning by the sea walls others sank to the bottom with their crews 
and others were swept down flaming as far as the islands Oxeia and Plateia. As a 
result the inhabitants of the City took courage whereas the enemy cowered with 
fear after experiencing the efficacious action of the liquid fire; for they had 
intended to beach their ships that evening by the sea walls and set their steering 
paddles upon the battlements. But God brought their counsel to naught through 
the intercession of the all pure Theotokos. That same night the pious emperor 
stealthily drew up the chain on the Galata side. The enemy, however, thinking 
that the emperor had drawn it aside with a view to entrapping them did not dare 
move in and anchor on the inside of Galata. Instead, they sailed up to the bay of 
Sosthenion and made their fleet secure there.

545

  On 8 October their leader Souleiman died and Oumar became emir.
  That winter proved very severe in Thrace, so much so that for a 
hundred days the earth could not be seen beneath the congealed 
snow. As a result, the enemy lost a multitude of horses, camels, and 
other animals. In the spring Souphiam arrived with a fleet that had 
been built in Egypt: he had 400 transports laden with corn as well as 
dromones. Having been informed of the efficacy of the Roman fire, 
397   he sailed past Bithynia and crossed to the harbour of Kalos 
Agros on the other side, where he anchored. Shortly thereafter, Izid, 
too, arrived with another fleet that had been built in Africa: he had 
360 transports, a store of arms, and provisions. He had received the 
same information about the liquid fire and so put in at Satyros and 
Bryas, all the way to Kartalimen. Now the Egyptian [crews] of 
these two fleets took counsel among themselves and, after seizing 
at night the skiffs of the transports, sought refuge in the City and 
acclaimed the emperor; as they did so, the sea, all the way from 
Hiereia to the City, appeared to be covered with timber. When the 
emperor had been informed by them of the two fleets hidden in the 
bay, he constructed fire bearing siphons which he placed in 
dromones and biremes and sent these against the fleets. With God's 
help, thanks to the intercession of the all pure Theotokos, the 
enemy were sunk on the spot. Our men took the enemy's supplies 
as booty and returned in joyous victory. Furthermore, while 
Mardasan was raiding with his Arab army from Pylai to Nicaea and 
Nicomedia, the imperial officers who, like Mardaites, were 
concealed with their foot soldiers at Libos and Sophon, suddenly 
attacked them and broke them in pieces and so forced them to 
withdraw from those parts. In this way the seacoast on the other 
side gained a short respite, so that ships could go out of the City 
and obtain plentiful provisions. Likewise, fishing boats were not 
prevented from catching fish near the islands and the city walls. 
The Arabs, on the other hand, suffered from a severe famine, so that 
they ate all of their dead animals, namely horses, asses, and camels. 
It is said that they even cooked in ovens and ate dead men and their 
own dung which they leavened. A pestilence fell upon them also 
and killed an infinite number of them. Furthermore, the Bulgarian 
nation made war on them and, as well informed persons affirm, 
massacred 22,000 Arabs. Many other calamities befell them at that 
time and made them learn by   398 experience that God and the 
all holy Virgin, the Mother of God, protect this City and the 
Christian Empire, and that those who call upon God in truth are not 
entirely forsaken, even if we are chastised for a short time on account 
of our sins.
546
547AM 6210 (AD 717/18)
Year of the divine Incarnation 710 Leo, 
2nd year
Oumaros, leader of the Arabs (2 years), 1st year 
Germanus, 4th year
John, 13th year
In this year Sergius, who was protospatharios and strategos of Sicily, on 
learning that the Saracens were besieging the Imperial City, crowned in 
those parts his own emperor, one of his men, called Basil, a native of 
Constantinople, son of Gregory Onomagoulos, whom he renamed 
Tiberius. The latter appointed his own dignitaries with the consent of the 
aforementioned Sergius. When the emperor had heard of this, he 
dispatched Paul, chartulary of his own household, whom he promoted 
patrician and strategos of Sicily, and gave him as helpers (two spatharii 
and a few men to serve him) as well as orders addressed to the western 
commanders and a sacra to the people. These men embarked at night on 
an expeditionary dromon and sailed off to the region of Kyzikos. Having 
made their journey from place to place, by both land and sea, they 
suddenly arrived in Sicily. When they had entered Syracuse, Sergius was 
amazed to hear of it; recognizing his own guilt, he sought refuge with the 
Lombards who dwell adjacent to Calabria. When the people had 
assembled and been assured by the reading aloud of the sacra that the 
Empire stood firm and that the City was confident as regards the enemy; 
when, furthermore, they had been told about the two fleets, they 
immediately acclaimed Leo as emperor and surrendered to the strategos 
as captives both Basil Onomagoulos and the dignitaries who had been 
appointed by him. He caused Basil and the latter's commander in chief to 
be beheaded and sent to the emperor their heads preserved in vinegar by 
care of the spatharii. The others

399   he exiled, after having them scourged and tonsured and, in 
some cases, cutting off their noses. As a result, great order 
prevailed in the western parts. As for the aforementioned Sergius, 
he sought and obtained from the strategos a promise of immunity 
and so joined him; and all the western parts were pacified.
  When Oumaros had become master of the Arabs, he ordered 
Masalmas to turn back, and, on 15 August, the Hagarenes moved off in 
great shame. As their fleet sailed away, a God sent storm fell upon 
them and scattered them through the intercession of the Mother of 
God. Some sank by Prokonesos and the other islands, others by 
Apostropha and the adjoining shores. The remainder were going 
through the Aegean Sea when a terrible calamity came over them; 
for a fiery hail fell upon them and brought the sea water to a boil, 
and as the pitch of their keels dissolved, their ships sank in the deep, 
crews and all. Only ten of them escaped, and this by God's 
providence, so as to proclaim both to us and to the Arabs the divine 
prodigies they had experienced. Some of our men chanced upon 
them and were able to seize five of them, while the other five 
escaped to Syria to announce God's mighty deeds.
  In the same year, after a violent earthquake had occurred in Syria, 
Oumar banned the use of wine in cities and set about forcing the 
Christians to become converted: those that converted he exempted 
from tax, while those that refused to do so he killed and so produced 
many martyrs. He also decreed that a Christian's testimony against a 
Saracen should not be accepted. He composed a letter concerning 
religion addressed to the emperor Leo in the belief that he would 
persuade him to convert.
550





Leo, 3rd year 
Oumaros, 2nd year 
Germanus, 5th 
year John, 14th 
year
   In this year a son was born to the impious emperor Leo, namely 
the yet more impious Constantine, the precursor of the 400 Antichrist. 
On the 25th of the month of December Leo's wife Maria was crowned 
in the Augusteus hall and solemnly processed alone to the Great 
Church, without her husband. After praying in front of the sanctuary 
doors, she went over to the Great Baptistery, which her husband had 
entered earlier along with a few members of his household. While the 
archbishop Germanus was baptizing there the successor to their 
wicked empire, namely Constantine, a terrible
5
5
1


and evil smelling sign was manifested in his very infancy, for he 
defecated in the holy font, as affirmed by actual eyewitnesses. 
Whereupon the most holy patriarch Germanus declared prophetically 
that that sign denoted the great evil that would befall the Christians 
and the Church on account of Constantine. When he had been baptized, 
the chief men of the themata and of the Senate received him as 
sponsors. After the holy liturgy, the Augusta Maria returned in 
procession with her baptized son and distributed largess on her way from 
the church to the Bronze Gate of the palace.
  In the same year Niketas Xylinites wrote to Artemios at 
Thessalonica, urging him to go over to Terbelis with a view to 
attacking Leo with Bulgarian support. Consenting to do so, Artemios 
went off and obtained an army as well as 50 centenaria of gold. Thus 
equipped, he marched on Constantinople. Since, however, the City did 
not accept him, the Bulgarians surrendered him to Leo and returned 
home, duly rewarded by the latter. The emperor put him to death along 
with Xylinites, whose fortune he confiscated: the man was his magistros 
and very rich. The Bulgarians also beheaded the patrician Sisinnios 
surnamed Rendakis who was a companion of Artemios, and they 
betrayed to the emperor the archbishop of Thessalonica, who was 
beheaded along with Artemios. Likewise Leo put to death the patrician 
Isoes, who was comes of
401 Opsikion, Theoktistos the protoasekretis, and Niketas Anthrax, 
Commander of the Wall, for being friends and supporters of Artemios. 
Others he banished, after cutting off their noses and confiscating their 
property.


552




Year of the divine Incarnation 712
Leo, emperor of the Romans (24 years), 4th year lzid, leader 
of the Arabs (4 years), 1st year
553

Germanus, bishop of Constantinople (15 years), 6th year John, 
bishop of Jerusalem (30 years), 15th year
   In this year, the 3rd indiction, on Easter day Constantine was crowned 
by his father Leo in the Tribunal of the Nineteen Couches. The customary 
prayers were recited by the blessed patriarch Germanus.
  In the same year Oumaros, who had been emir of the Arabs 2 years and 4 
months, died and lzid became emir. There rose up against him a usurper 
in Persia, called like him lzid Moualabi, and many Persians joined his 
cause. lzid sent Masalmas, who killed him and subjugated Persia.



(AM 6213, AD 720/1)
Leo, 5th year Izid, 
2nd year
Germanus, 7th year John, 
16th year
In this year there appeared a certain Syrian, who was a false messiah and 
deceived the Jews by calling himself Christ, the son of God.





Leo, 6th year Izid, 
3rd year
Germanus, 8th year John, 
nth year
In this year the emperor forced the Jews and the Montanists to accept 
baptism. The Jews, for their part, were baptized against their will and then 
washed off their baptism; and they partook of holy communion on a full 
stomach and so defiled the faith. As for the
554

Montanists, they made divination among themselves and, after 
determining a certain day, entered the houses appointed for their 
false worship and burnt themselves. 




Leo, 7th year 
Izid, 4th year
Germanus, 9th 
year John, 18th 
year
   In this year a Jewish magician, who was a native of Laodikeia in 
Maritime Phoenicia, came to Izid and promised him that he would
reign forty years over the Arabs if he destroyed the holy icons that
	
402 were venerated in Christian churches throughout his dominions.
The senseless Izid was persuaded by him and decreed a general 
constitution against the holy images. But by the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ and by the intercessions of His chaste Mother and of all the 
saints, Izid died that same year before his satanic constitution had 
come to the notice of most people. The emperor Leo partook of the 
same error, a grievous and illicit one, and so became responsible for 
inflicting many evils upon us. He found a partner in this boorishness, a 
man called Beser, a former Christian who had been taken captive in 
Syria, who had abjured the Christian faith and become imbued with 
Arab doctrines and who, not long before, had been freed from their 
servitude and returned to the Roman state. Because of his physical 
strength and like mindedness in error, he was honoured by the same 
Leo. This man, then, became the emperor's ally with regard to this 
great evil. Another of his wicked coadjutors was the bishop of 
Nakoleia who was filled with every kind of impurity and lived in 
similar boorishness.


55 
5





Leo, 8th year
Isam, leader of the Arabs (19 years), 1st year Germanus, l0th 
year
John, 19th year
I am now going to tell the story of the blessed Stephen, Pope of Rome, 
how he fled to the land of the Franks and was saved.
  This celebrated man Stephen suffered many ills at the hands of 
Astulphos, king of the Lombards. He sought refuge among the Franks at 
the time of Pippin, who was majordomo and chief of the administration 
of all the affairs of the Frankish nation: for it was their custom that their 
lord, that is their king, would reign by virtue of heredity, but take no part 
in the administration and do nothing except eat and drink inordinately. 
He would live at home and on 1 May would preside over the whole 
nation to greet them and to receive their greetings and customary gifts 
and to give them gifts in return, and then would live by himself until the 
following May. He has a majordomo, as the man is called, who 
administers all the affairs according to the king's and the nation's wishes. 
The descendants of that line were called Kristatai, which means 'hairy 
backs': for, like pigs, they had bristles sprouting from their back.
  Now, the aforementioned Stephen, compelled by the cruelty and 
senselessness of Astulphos, obtained the latter's permission to proceed 
to the Frankish country to do whatever he was able. When he arrived, 
he performed the investiture of Pippin, a man who was then



greatly esteemed and was also administrator of public affairs on the king's 
behalf; who, furthermore, had fought the Arabs who had crossed from 
Africa to Spain, the same who have held Spain until now, and attempted to 
make war even against the Franks. The said Pippin opposed them with his 
host; he killed the commander of the enemy, Abderachman, as well as a 
countless multitude of them by the river Eridanos, and drew his nation's 
admiration and love, not only for this deed, but also on account of his other 
qualities. He was the first to rule his nation not by virtue of heredity, the said 
Stephen having absolved him of his oath to the king, tonsured his 
predecessor and confined him honourably in a comfortable monastery. This 
Pippin had two sons, the brothers Karoulos and Karoulomagnos.
  In the same year lzid, who had been Caliph of the Arabs for four years, died 
His brother Isam became Caliph and started to build palaces in the country and 
in towns, to lay out plantations and gardens and to channel water. He campaigned 
against the Roman country and, after losing many of his men, returned home.
Stephen, the Pope of Rome, sought refuge with the Franks.




Leo, 9th year 
Isam, 2nd year
Gregory, bishop of Rome (9 years), 1st year Germanus, 
11th year
John, 20th year
This year the impious emperor Leo started making pronouncements 
about the removal of the holy and venerable icons. When Gregory, the 
Pope of Rome, had been informed of this, he withheld the taxes of Italy 
and of Rome and wrote to Leo a doctrinal letter to the effect that an 
emperor ought not to make pronouncements concerning the faith nor to 
alter the ancient doctrines of the Church which had been defined by the 
holy Fathers.
  The same year a swollen stream flooded the city of Edessa and killed 
many people.



(AM 6218, AD 725/6]
Leo, 10st year 
Isam, 3rd year 
Gregory, 2nd 
year
Germanus, 12th year 
John 21st year
   This year Masalmas made a campaign against Caesarea in Cappadocia 
and captured it. There was a plague in Syria. The Caliph's camels were 
burnt at St Elijah's. Mauias, Isam's son, made a campaign against the 
Roman country and returned home after marching up and down.
  In the summer season of the same year, indiction 9 a vapor as from 
a fiery furnace boiled up for a few days from the depth of the sea 
between the islands of Thera and Therasia. As it gradually became 
thicker and filled with stones because of the heat of the burning fire, 
all the smoke took on a fiery appearance. Then, on account of the 
density of the earthy substance, pumice stones as big as hills were 
thrown up against all of Asia Minor, Lesbos, Abydos, and coastal 
Macedonia, so that the entire surf ace of that sea was filled with 
floating pumice. In the midst of so great a fire an island that had not 
previously existed was formed and joined to the Sacred Island, as it is 
called; for, just as the aforementioned islands Thera and Therasia had 
once been thrown up, so was this one, too, in the
present days of God's enemy Leo. Thinking that God's wrath was  405   in 
his favour instead of being directed against him, he stirred up a more 
ruthless war on the holy and venerable icons, having as his ally the renegade 
Beser who rivaled his own senselessness; for both of them were filled with 
boorishness and complete ignorance, the cause of most evils. The populace of 
the Imperial City were much distressed by the newfangled doctrines and 
meditated an assault upon him. They also killed a few of the emperor's men 
who had taken down the Lord's image that was above the great Bronze Gate, 
with the result that many of them were punished in the cause of the true 
faith by
559


mutilation, lashes, banishment, and fines, especially those who were 
prominent by birth and culture. This led to the extinction of schools 
and of the pious education that had lasted from St Constantine the 
Great until our days, but was destroyed, along with many other good 
things, by this Saracen minded Leo.
  At this juncture the inhabitants of Hellas and the Cyclades, moved 
by divine zeal, came to an accord and revolted against him with a 
great fleet, bringing in their train a certain Kosmas who was to be 
crowned emperor. The expedition was commanded by Agallianos, 
turmarch of the Helladics, and Stephen. They approached the Imperial 
City on 18 April of the 10st indication and, after joining battle with the 
people of Byzantium, had their ships burnt with artificial fire and were 
defeated. Some of them were drowned by the Hollow, among them 
Agallianos, who threw him­ self in the sea armed as he was, while the 
survivors deserted to the emperor. Kosmas and Stephen were 
beheaded. As for the impious Leo and his supporters, they grew in 
wickedness as they intensified the persecution of the true faith.
  At the summer solstice of the same 10st indiction, after the unhappy 
defeat of our fellow countrymen, a multitude of Saracens led by two 
emirs was drawn up against Nicaea in Bithynia: Amer with 15,000 
scouts led the van and surrounded the town which he found 
unprepared, while Mauias followed with another 85,000   406 men. After a 
long siege and a partial destruction of the walls, they did not overpower 
the town thanks to the acceptable prayers addressed to God by the 
holy Fathers who are honoured there in a church (wherein their 
venerable images are set up to this very day and are honoured by those 
who believe as they did). A certain Constantine, however, who was the 
strator of Artabasdos, on seeing an image of the Theotokos that had 
been set up, picked up a stone and threw it at her. He broke the image 
and trampled upon it when it had fallen down. He then saw in a vision 
the Lady standing beside him and saying to him: 'See, what a brave 
thing you have done to me! Verily, upon your head have you done it.' 
The next day, when the Saracens attacked the walls and battle was 
joined, that wretched man rushed to the wall like the brave soldier he 
was and was struck by a stone discharged from a siege engine, and it 
broke his head and face, a just reward for his impiety. After collecting 
many captives and much booty, the Arabs withdrew.  In this manner God 
showed to the impious one that he had overcome his fellow countrymen 
not on account of his piety, as he himself boasted, but for some divine 
cause and inscrutable judgement, whereby so great an Arab force was 
driven away from the city of the holy Fathers thanks
560



to their intercession, on account of their most exact likenesses that are 
honoured therein, and this, too, in reproof and unanswerable 
condemnation of the tyrant and in vindication of the true believers. Not 
only was the impious man in error concerning the relative worship of the 
holy icons, but also concerning the intercession of the all pure Theotokos 
and all the saints, and he abominated their relics like his mentors, the Arabs. 
From this time on he impudently harassed the blessed Germanus, patriarch 
of Constantinople, blaming all the emperors, bishops, and Christian people 
who had lived before him for having committed idolatry in worshipping 
the holy and venerable icons, unable as he was to grasp the argument 
concerning relative veneration because of his lack of faith and crass 
ignorance.

561



Leo, 11th year 
Isam, 4th year 
Gregory, 3rd year
Germanus, 13th year 
John, 22nd year



In this year Mauias captured the fort Ateous and returned home.

(AM 6220, AD 727/8]
Leo, 12th year Isam, 
5th year Gregory, 4th 
year
Germanus, 14th year John, 
23rd year
In this year the son of the Chagan, that is the ruler of Chazaria, invaded 
Media and Armenia. In Armenia he encountered the Arab general Garachos, 
whom he slew together with his army. After devastating the lands of the 
Armenians and the Medes and causing great fear to the Arabs, he returned 
home.





Leo, 13th year Isam, 
6th year Gregory, 5th 
year
Germanus, 15th year John, 
24th year
In this year Masalmas invaded the land of the Turks. He joined battle with 
them and there were many casualties on both sides. Seized by cowardice, 
Masalmas took to flight and returned through the mountains of Chazaria.
  The same year the lawless emperor Leo in his raging fury against the 
correct faith summoned the blessed Germanus and began to entice him 
with flattering words. The blessed bishop said to him,
563


'We have heard it said that there will be a destruction of the holy and 
venerable icons, but not in your reign.' When the other compelled him 
to declare in whose reign that would be, he said, 'That of Konon.' Then 
Leo said, 'Truly, my baptismal name is Konon.' The patriarch replied, 
'May not this evil be accomplished in your reign, 0 lord! For he who 
commits this deed is the precursor of the Antichrist and the subverter of 
the divine Incarnation.' Waxing irritated at this, the tyrant assailed the 
blessed man as Herod had once done to the Forerunner. The patriarch 
reminded him of the covenants he had made before becoming emperor, 
namely that he had sworn by God not to undermine the Church with 
respect to any of her apostolic and God given rites. Not even then, 
however, was the wretched man put to shame. He spied on the patriarch 
and tried to put in his mouth certain statements against his imperial 
Majesty: for if, by chance, he found him making such statements, he 
would 408   depose him from his throne as a mover of sedition and 
not as a confessor. In this he had an ally and a partner in the person of 
Anastasios, pupil and synkellos of Germanus, to whom he had 
promised (inasmuch as Anastasios shared his impiety) to make him 
succeed adulterously to the episcopal throne. The blessed man was not 
unaware that Anastasios was holding such a perverse position: 
imitating his own Lord, he wisely and gently kept bringing to his 
attention, as to another Judas Iscariot, the circumstances of the 
betrayal. Seeing him, however, to be irrevocably in error, once when he 
was on his way to the emperor and Anastasios had stepped on the hind 
part of his vestments, he turned to him and said, 'Don't hurry, you will 
enter the Diippion in good time!' Anastasios was disturbed by these 
words and, along with others who had heard them, was unaware of the 
prediction, which came to pass fifteen years later, in the 3rd year of 
Constantine the persecutor, indiction 12, and convinced everybody that 
the prophecy had been delivered to the ungrateful man by divine 
grace. For when Constantine had obtained the Empire after the 
sedition of his brother in law Artabasdos, he had Anastasios flogged 
along with other enemies and paraded him naked in the Hippodrome, 
by way of the Diippion, seated backwards on a donkey; and this 
because Anastasios had cursed him, as did his other enemies, and had 
crowned Artabasdos as will be related in the proper place. So then, this 
holy and admirable man Germanus was prominent in defending pious 
doctrine in Byzantium and fought the wild beast Leo (fitly so named) 
and the latter's supporters; while in the Elder Rome it was Gregory, 
that most holy and apostolic man, enthroned next to Peter, the chief 
apostle, who shone forth in word and deed and who severed Rome, 
Italy, and all the western lands
564



from civil and ecclesiastical subjection to Leo and the latter's domain. 
And in Damascus of Syria there shone forth in his life and discourse 
John of the Golden Stream, son of Mansour, a presbyter and a monk, a 
most excellent teacher. Now Leo ejected Germanus, who was subject to 
him, from the episcopal throne, while Gregory reproved him openly in 
his widely known Letters and John, together with the eastern bishops, 
subjected the impious man to anathema.
  On 7 January of the 13th indiction, a Tuesday, the impious Leo 
convened a silentium against the holy and venerable icons in the 409   
Tribunal of the Nineteen Couches, to which he had also invited the most 
holy patriarch Germanus, whom he thought he could persuade to sign a 
condemnation of the icons. But Christ's courageous servant was in no 
way persuaded by Leo's abominable error: after expounding correctly the 
true doctrine, he resigned from the episcopacy and surrendered his 
pallium. Following many words of instruction he said, 'If I am Jonah, cast 
me into the sea. For without an ecumenical council it is impossible for 
me, 0 emperor, to innovate in matters of faith.' He retired to his family 
house at the so called Platanion having served as bishop 14 years, 5 
months, and 7 days. On the 22nd of the same month of January 
Anastasios, the spurious pupil and synkellos of the blessed Germanus, 
who had adopted Leo's impiety, was ordained and appointed false bishop 
of Constantinople on account of his worldly ambition. Gregory, however, 
the holy bishop of Rome, as I have said, repudiated Anastasios along 
with his libelli and reproved Leo by means of letters for the latter's 
impiety. He also severed Rome and all of Italy from Leo's dominion. In 
his anger the tyrant intensified the assault on the holy icons.
   Many clerics, monks, and pious laymen faced danger on behalf of 
the true faith and won the crown of martyrdom.

566



Leo, 14th year 
Isam, 7th year 
Gregory, 6th year
Anastasios, bishop of Constantinople (24 years), 1st year John, 
25th year
In this year Masalmas invaded the Roman country. He came to Cappadocia 
and captured the fort Charsianon  by deceit.




Leo, 15th year 
Isam, 8th year 
Gregory, 7th year
Anastasios, 2nd year 
John, 26th year
In this year Masalmas invaded Turkey. He reached the Caspian Gates and 
withdrew in fear. 





Leo, 16th year 
Isam, 9th year 
Gregory, 8th year
Anastasios, 3rd year John, 
27th year

In this year the emperor Leo betrothed his son Constantine to the daughter of 
the Chagan, that is the ruler of the Scythians. He   410 made her a Christian 
and named her Irene. She learned Holy Scripture and lived piously, thus 
reproving the impiety of those men.
567


Mauias, son of lsamos, invaded the Roman country. He came as far as Paphlagonia 
and withdrew with many captives.
  Now the emperor, who was furious with the pope for the secession of Rome 
and Italy, fitted out and dispatched against them a great fleet under the 
command of Manes, strategos of the Kibyraiots. The wretched man was, 
however, put to shame when the fleet was shipwrecked in the Adriatic Sea. 
Then God's enemy became even more furious: possessed by his Arab 
mentality, he imposed a capitation tax on one third of the people of Sicily 
and Calabria. As for the so called Patrimonies of the holy chief apostles who 
are honoured in the Elder Rome (these, amounting to three and a half talents  of 
gold, had been from olden times paid to the churches), he ordered them to be 
paid to the Public Treasury. He also decreed that watch should be kept to have 
new, born male infants entered in a register as the Pharaoh had aforetime 
done in the case of the Jews, something that not even his mentors the Arabs 
have ever done to the Christians in the East.
5 68




Leo, 17th year Isam, 
10th year Gregory, 
9th year
Anastasios, 4th year John, 
28th year
In this year there was a plague in Syria and many people died.






Leo, 18th year Isam, 
11th year
Zacharias, bishop of Rome (21 years), 1st year 
Anastasios, 5th year John, 
29th year
In this year Theodore, son of Mansour, was banished to the desert 
regions. A fiery sign that gave forth light appeared in the sky. Mauias 
devastated Asia.





Leo, 19th year Isam, 
12th year Zacharias, 
2nd year
Anastasios, 6th year John, 
30th year
In this year Souleiman, son of Isam, invaded the land of Armenia, but did 
not accomplish anything.


(AM 6228, AD 735/6)
Leo, 20th year 
Isam, 13th year 
Zacharias, 3rd 
year
Anastasios, 7th year
In this year Mauias invaded the Roman country. A few days after his return 
he fell from his horse and died.




Leo 21st year 
Isam, 14th year
Zacharias, 4th year 
Anastasios, 8th year
In this year Souleiman, son of Isam, took many captives in Asia, among 
them a certain native of Pergamon who claimed to be Tiberius, son of 
Justinian. In order to honour his own son and to frighten the emperors, 
Isam dispatched this man to Jerusalem with the appropriate imperial 
honours, namely a guard of soldiers with banners and scepters, and 
decreed that he should tour all of Syria with great pomp so that all 
should see him and be amazed.


(AM 6230, AD 737/8)
Leo, 22nd year 
Isam, 15th year
Zacharias, 5th year
Anastasios, 9th year
In this year Souleiman, son of Isam, invaded the Roman country and

5 
70

captured the fort called Sideron. He took prisoner Eustathios, son of 
the patrician Marianos





Leo, 23rd year Isam, 
16th year Zacharias, 6th 
year
Anastasios, 10th year
In this year, in the month of May, indiction 8 Souleiman invaded the Roman 
country with 90,000 men under four commanders. One of these, Gamer, led 
the van with 10,000 scouts and set up ambushes in the region of Asia. He 
was followed by Melich and Batal with 20,000 cavalry as far as the area of 
Akroinos and, after them, Souleiman with 60,000 men advanced to the area 
of Tyana in Cappadocia. Those in Asia and Cappadocia captured many 
men, women, and animals and returned home unharmed, whereas the 
contingents of Melich and Batal were fought and defeated by Leo and 
Constantine at Akroinos. Most of them, including the two commanders, 
perished by the sword. About 6,800 of their warriors, however, fought on and 
fled to Synada. They safely joined Souleiman and returned to Syria. In the 
same year many were killed by them in Africa as well, including the 
commander called Damaskenos.

571



412	[AM 6232, AD 739/40)
Leo, 24th year 
Isam, 17th year 
Zacharias, 7th year
Anastasios, 11th year
In this year, the 24th of the reign of the lawless tyrant, the Syrian Leo, 
markets in Damascus were burnt by the Hierakites, who were put to the 
gallows. Edessa was flooded by its stream on the 28th of the month 
Peritios.
  In the same year a violent and fearful earthquake occurred at 
Constantinople on 26 October, indiction 9, a Wednesday, in the 8th 
hour. Many churches and monasteries collapsed and many people died. 
There also fell down the statue of Constantine the Great that stood 
above the gate of Atalos as well as that of Atalos himself, the statue of 
Arkadios that stood on the column of the Xerolophos, and the statue of 
Theodosios the Great above the Golden Gate; further­ more, the land 
walls of the City,4 many towns and villages in Thrace, Nicomedia in 
Bithynia, Prainetos, and Nicaea, where only one church was spared. In 
some places the sea withdrew from its proper boundaries. The quakes 
continued for twelve months.
   On seeing that the walls of the City had fallen down, the emperor 
addressed the people saying: 'You do not have the means to build the 
walls, so we have given orders to the tax collectors to exact according 
to the register one additional miliaresion for every gold piece. The 
imperial government will collect that and build the walls.' So started the 
custom of paying two extra carats6 to the tax gatherers. It was the year 
6248 from the creation of the world, that is from Adam according to the 
Romans, 6232 according to the Egyptians, that is the Alexandrians, 
1063 from Philip according to the Macedonians. Leo reigned from 25 
March of the 15th indiction until 18 June of the 9th indiction, a reign of 
24 years, 2 months, 25 days. So also his son Constantine, who 
succeeded to his impiety and his kingdom, reigned from the same 18 
June of the 9th indiction 413   until 14 September of the 14th 
indiction. He reigned, by God's dispensation, 34 years, 3 months, 2 
days. So then, as we have said, in that same year of the 9th indiction, on 
18 June, Leo died the death not only of his soul, but also of his body 
and his son Constantine
572



became emperor. The evils that befell the Christians at the time of the 
impious Leo both as regards the orthodox faith and civil 
administration, the latter in Sicily, Calabria, and Crete for reasons of 
dishonest gain and avarice; furthermore, the secession of Italy because 
of his evil doctrine, the earthquakes, famines, pestilences, and foreign 
insurrections (not to mention all the details) have been related in the 
preceding chapters. It is now proper to review in succession the 
lawless deeds, yea, even more sacrilegious and abhorred by God, of his 
most impious and altogether wretched son, yet to do so objectively 
(inasmuch as all seeing God is observing us) for the benefit of posterity 
and of those wretched and wicked men who still follow the abominable 
heresy of that criminal, namely by recounting his impious actions from 
the 10th indiction, the first year of his reign, until the 14th indiction, the 
year of his damnation. Now this pernicious, crazed, bloodthirsty, and 
most savage beast, who seized power by illegal usurpation, from the 
very start parted company from our God and Saviour Jesus Christ, His 
pure and all holy Mother and all the saints; led astray as he was by 
magic, licentiousness, bloody sacrifices, by the dung and urine of 
horses and delighting in impurity and the invocation of demons. In a 
word, he was reared from early youth in all soul destroying pursuits. 
And when he took over both his father's dominion and his wickedness, 
need one explain how great an evil he straight away kindled and fanned 
into a conspicuous flame that rose up into the air? When the Christians 
saw these things they were seized by great despondency, so that 
everyone immediately hated him for his effrontery and took up the 
cause of his brother in law (by his sister Anna), Artabasdos, the 
curopalates and comes of Opsikion, with a view to giving him 414   
the Empire inasmuch as he was orthodox. 
  In the same year Isam, the ruler of the Arabs, put to death the Christian 
prisoners in all the towns of his realm, among them the blessed Eustathios, 
son of the distinguished patrician Marianas, who did not abjure his pure 
faith in spite of much violence and proved to be a true martyr at Harran, a 
notable city of Mesopotamia, where his precious and holy relics work all 
manner of healing by God's grace. Many others, too, met their death in 
martyrdom and blood.


57
3




Year of the divine Incarnation 733
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (35 years) 1st year Isam, 
leader of the Arabs (19 years), 18th year
Zacharias, bishop of Rome (21 years), 8th year
Anastasios, bishop of Constantinople (24 years), 12th year
574

In this year the subverter of our ancestral customs, Constantine, became 
emperor by God's judgement on account of the multitude of our sins. On 
27 June of the following 10th indiction he marched forth against the Arabs 
and came to a place called Krasos in the region of Opsikion. Now the said 
Artabasdos was at Dorylaion with the Opsikian army and they eyed each 
other suspiciously. Constantine sent a message to him requesting that the 
latter's sons be sent to him; he wished to see them because they were his 
nephews. His purpose, however, was to seize them and keep them under 
guard. The other, comprehending his treachery and giving up all hope for 
himself; being, furthermore, aware of Constantine's infinite wickedness, 
spoke to his troops and, after winning them over to his views, attacked 
Constantine with all his men and killed by the sword the Saracen minded 
patrician Beser who had gone out to meet him. As for Constantine, he 
mounted an outrunner that happened to be saddled and fled to Amorion, 
where he sought refuge with the Anatolic thema, commanded at the time by 
Langinos. They protected him and he extended to them great promises. He 
immediately sent a message to Sisinnakios, who was then strategos of the 
Thrakesian thema, and
persuaded them, too, to fight on his side. Thus two emperors were   415 
proclaimed and there ensued terrible battles and conflicts between the 
subjects. Artabasdos, through the agency of the silentiarius Athanasios, 
sent an account of what had happened to the patrician and magistros 
Theophanes who was the emperor's locum tenens in the City. The latter, 
being favourable to Artabasdos, gathered the people in the gallery of the 
Great Church and persuaded everyone, by means of the letter and the 
testimony of the said Athanasios, that the emperor had died and Artabasdos 
had been proclaimed emperor by the themata. Thereupon all the people as 
well as Anastasios, the spurious patriarch, anathematized and cursed 
Constantine for being a wretch and God's enemy and gladly received the 
news of his murder as if they had been delivered of a great evil, while they 
proclaimed Artabasdos emperor inasmuch as he was orthodox and a 
defender of divine doctrine. Straight away Monotes sent a message to the 
Thracian region, addressed to his son Nikephoros, who was strategos of 
Thrace, bidding him collect the army that was there so as to guard the City. 
After closing the gates of the walls and setting a watch, he apprehended 
Constantine's friends whom he scourged, tonsured, and threw in gaol. After 
Artabasdos had entered the City with the Opsikian army, Constantine, too, 
arrived at Chrysopolis with the two themata, namely the Thrakesian and 
the Anatolic, but he failed to accomplish anything and so returned to winter 
at Amorion. Artabasdos, for his part, restored the holy icons throughout the 
City.

  The Arabs, aware of the internecine war between those men, made many 
captives in the Roman country under Souleiman's command. As for the false 
patriarch Anastasios, he swore to the people while holding the venerable and 
life giving Cross, 'By Him who was nailed to this, thus did the emperor 
Constantine say to me, namely, "Do not regard Mary's offspring, who is 
called Christ, as the Son of God, but as a mere man. For Mary gave birth 
to Him just as my mother Mary gave birth to me." ' When the people 
heard this, they cursed Constantine.




Constantine, 2nd year Isam, 
19th year Zacharias, 9th year 
Anastasios, 13th year
Stephen, bishop of Antioch (2 years), 1st year
   In this year Isam, the leader of the Arabs, died. He had been on 416 
friendly terms with a Syrian monk called Stephen, a man who was 
rather simple, but pious. Seeing that the most holy see of Antioch had 
been vacant for forty years (for the Arabs forbade that a patriarch 
should be appointed there), (he permitted) the eastern Christians, if 
they wished to be allowed to have a patriarch, to elect this Stephen. 
They, believing that this was happening by God's will, ordained him to 
the throne of Theoupolis. This dispensation has prevailed from that time 
until now.
   In this year Oualid, lsam's son, became ruler of the Arabs. Both 
Constantine and Artabasdos sought his alliance by dispatching to him, 
the former the spatharios Andrew, the latter the logothete Gregory. 
There was much drought and earthquakes occurred in several places 
so that mountains were joined to one another in the desert of Saba 
and villages were swallowed up by the earth.
  In this year Kosmas, patriarch of Alexandria, together with his flock 
reverted to orthodoxy from the Monothelete heresy which had 
prevailed from the time of Kyros, bishop of Alexandria under 
Herakleios. 
  Gamer invaded the Roman country with a multitude of Arabs and 
returned after making many captives. In the month of June a sign 
appeared in the sky to the north.
  Oualid ordered that Peter, the most holy metropolitan of 
Damascus, should have his tongue cut off because he was publicly 
reproving the impiety of the Arabs and the Manichees, and exiled him 
to Arabia Felix, where he died a martyr on behalf of Christ after reciting 
the holy liturgy. Those who have told the story affirm to have heard it 
with their own ears. This man's homonym and imitator, Peter of 
Maiouma, proved at the same time a voluntary martyr on behalf of 
Christ. Having fallen ill, he invited the prominent Arabs who were his 
friends (for he served as chartulary of the public taxes) and said to them: 
'May you receive from God the recompense for visiting me, even if you 
happen to be infidel friends. I wish you, however, to witness this my 
417   will: "Anyone who does not believe in the Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost, the consubstantial and life giving Trinity within a unity, is 
spiritually blind and deserving of eternal punishment. Such a one 
was Mouamed, your false prophet and precursor of the Antichrist. If 
you believe me as I testify to you today by heaven and earth (for I 
am your friend), abandon his fables that you may not be punished 
along with him." When they had heard him utter these and many 
other words about God, they were seized by astonishment and fury, 
but decided to be patient, thinking he was out of his mind on account 
of his illness. After he had recovered from his illness, however, he 
started to cry out even louder, 'Anathema on Mouamed and his fables 
and on everyone who believes in them!' Thereupon he was chastised 
with the sword and so became a
57
7

martyr. He has been honoured in a laudation by our holy father John, 
rightly surnamed the Golden Stream because of the golden gleam of 
spiritual grace that bloomed both in his discourse and his life John, 
whom the impious emperor Constantine subjected to an annual 
anathema because of his preeminent orthodoxy and, instead of his 
paternal name, Mansour (which means 'redeemed'), he, in his Jewish 
manner, renamed the new teacher of the Church Manzeros. 
In the same yea r (Oualid transferred the Cypriots to Syria.
  As for Artabasdos, he appointed his son Niketas commander in 
chief and sent him to the Armeniac thema, while his other son 
Nikephoros he had crowned by the patriarch Anastasios. In the same 
year,) in the month of May Artabasdos went forth to the region of 
Opsikion and, after raising an army, marched on Asia and started 
devastating it. Constantine, upon learning of this, moved against him 
and overtook him in the area of Sardis as the latter was coming up 
from Kelbianon. He joined battle, routed him, and pursued him as far 
as Kyzikos. On reaching Kyzikos, Artabasdos boarded a ship and 
escaped to the City. In the month of August of the same 11th
418 indiction, Niketas, the commander in chief, gave battle to Constantine 
near Modrine, but was defeated and fled. The patrician Tiridates the 
Armenian, who was Artabasdos' cousin and a brave soldier, was killed 
along with other choice commanders and there was much slaughter 
on both sides as the Armenians and Armeniacs fought the Anatolics 
and the Thrakesians, supporters of Constantine. The Devil, instigator 
of evil, roused in those days such fury and mutual slaughter among 
Christians that sons would murder their fathers without any mercy 
and brothers would murder their own brothers and pitilessly bum 
each other's houses and homes.
578





Constantine, 3rd year
Oualid, leader of the Arabs (1 year), 1st year Zacharias, 10th 
year
Anastasios, 14th year 
Stephen, 2nd year
In this year a sign appeared in the north and in some places dust fell down from 
heaven. There was also an earthquake at the Caspian Gates.
579

  Oualid was killed by the Arabs on 16 April, a Thursday, after a reign of one 
year, and power was seized by lzid the Defective. This man took Damascus 
thanks to large distributions of money and received pledges of submission 
from the Arabs in Damascus, Persia and Egypt. When, however, these 
matters had been reported to Marouam, son of Mouamed, the governor of 
Armenia, he arrived in Mesopotamia, ostensibly to support Oualid's sons 
and oppose lzid. Five months later lzid died, leaving his brother Abraim to 
succeed him at Damascus. Marouam made war on him, having on his side 
the men of Mesopotamia: he marched to Edessa and thence to the region 
of Damascus and the Antilebanon to a plain called Garis, where he gave 
battle to Souleiman by the river Litas (that is the Evil river), routed him, and 
killed 20,000. Souleiman fled with a few men and found
419	refuge at Damascus. When he had entered the city, he slew Oualid's
sons, whom Marouam appeared to be supporting, and then left Damascus 
after laying his hands on a considerable sum of money. Then Marouam, too, 
came to Damascus: he killed many prominent men and those who had lent 
themselves to the murder of Oualid and the latter's children, while others he 
maimed. He then transferred all the moneys and treasures to Harran, a city 
of Mesopotamia. 
  In the month of September, indiction 12, Constantine came to the area 
of Chalcedon and crossed to Thrace, while Sisinnios, strategos of the 
Thrakesians, had crossed by way of Abydos and laid siege to the land 
walls. Coming to the Charsian gate, Constantine proceeded as far as 
the Golden Gate showing himself to the populace and then withdrew 
and struck up camp at St Mamas. Those in the City began 
experiencing shortages of supplies: accordingly, Artabasdos dispatched 
the a secretis Athanasios and Artabasdos, his domesticus, to bring 
supplies by ship. The fleet of the Kibyraiots found these men beyond 
Abydos, arrested them and brought them to the emperor, who donated 
the grain to his own men and straight away blinded Athanasios and 
Artabasdos. After this, Artabasdos attempted to open the gates of the 
land walls and give battle to Constantine, but the men of Artabasdos 
were routed in the engagement and many were killed, including 
Monotes. Then Artabasdos constructed fire bearing biremes and sent 
them to St Mamas against the fleet of the Kibyraiots, but when these 
had set out, the Kibyraiots sallied forth and chased them away. There 
was a severe famine in the City, so much so that a modius of barley 
sold for 12 nomismata, a modius of pulse for 19, one of millet or lupins 
for 8, oil at 5 measures to a nomisma, and a pint of wine for a 
semissis. As the people
20	were dying, Artabasdos was forced to let them leave the City, but he 
took note of their faces and some he prevented from leaving. For
580


this reason some painted their faces and put on female dress, while 
others donned monastic costume and garments of hair and in this guise 
they were able to escape detection and leave. Now Niketas, the 
monostrategos, gathered his army that had scattered at Modrine and 
came to Chrysopolis; and as he was turning back, the emperor crossed 
the straits and pursued him. He overtook him at Nicomedia and 
captured him together with the curator Marcellinus (an ex bishop), 
whom he immediately ordered to be beheaded. The monostrategos, 
however, he chained and exhibited him to his father on the other side of 
the walls. On 2 November he suddenly drew up his forces in the 
evening and took the City through the land walls. Artabasdos, for his 
part, boarded a ship together with the patrician Baktangios and departed 
temporarily to Opsikion. He went off to the fort Pouzane and made 
himself secure. The emperor, however, apprehended them: Artabasdos 
with his two sons he blinded, while Baktangios he beheaded in the 
Kynegion and hung up his head at the Milion for three days. Thirty 
years later the unforgiving and merciless emperor ordered that man's 
wife to proceed to the monastery of Chora (where he had been buried), 
dig up his bones, place them in her pallium, and cast them at the so 
called tombs of Pelagios among the bodies of executed criminals. What 
inhumanity! He killed many other prominent men who had assisted 
Artabasdos, blinded a multitude without number, and cut off the arms 
and legs of others. He allowed the provincial officers who had entered 
the City with him to break into houses and seize citizens' possessions 
and inflicted numberless other calamities on the City. He also held 
hippodrome games and brought in through the Diippion Artabasdos 
with his sons and friends, all in fetters, as well as the false patriarch 
Anastasios, who had been publicly scourged and was seated on an
ass facing backwards. He thus brought him into the Hippodrome and   421 
paraded him, and then once again, after terrorizing him and bending
him to his will (for the man held beliefs similar to his own), seated him 
on the episcopal throne. As for Sisinnios, the patrician and strategos of 
the Thrakesians, who had helped him greatly and had fought on his 
side, and was moreover his cousin, he blinded forty days later by God's 
righteous judgement. For it is written that he who helps the impious 
shall fall into his hands.


581

582





Year of the divine Incarnation 736
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (35 years), 4th year 
Marouam, leader of the Arabs (6 years), 1st year Zacharias, 
bishop of Rome (21 years), 11th year
Anastasios, bishop of Constantinople (24 years), 15th year Theophylaktos, 
bishop of Antioch (7 years), 1st year
In this year a great comet appeared in Syria. Thebit and Dahak the Arourite 
rebelled against Marouam. Marouam captured them and killed them in the 
territory of Emesa together with 12,000 warriors. In the same year, at the 
request of the eastern Christians, he allowed that Theophylaktos, a priest of 
Edessa, should be ordained patriarch of Antioch (for Stephen had died) and 
ordered that he should be honoured by the Arabs in public decrees: for the ma 
n was adorned with spiritual gifts, especially that of chastity. At Emesa he 
impaled 120 Chalbenoi and he killed Abas in prison, a man who had shed 
much Christian blood and had devastated and depopulated many places. The 
Ethiopian who was dispatched by Marouam to carry out this task filled a bag 
with unslaked lime and, having approached Abas, placed it over his head and 
nostrils and so smothered him, thus contriving a just punishment for the 
magician. For he had wrought much evil to the Christians by means of magic 
and the invocation of demons. He had also shared in the murder of Oualid.




422	(AM 6237, AD 744/5]
Constantine, 5th year 
Marouam, 2nd year 
Zacharias, 12th year 
Anastasios, 16th year 
Theophylaktos, 2nd year
 In this year Souleiman gathered his armies and, after engaging 
Marouam once again , was defeated with the loss of 7,000 men and 
escaped, first to Palmyra and then to Persia. The inhabitants of Emesa, 
Helioupolis, and Damascus raised a rebellion and shut their gates to 
Marouam. The latter sent his son at the head of an army against Dahak 
and himself came to Emesa, which he captured after a siege of four 
months. Dahak, for his part, was marching from Persia with a great 
force. Marouam engaged him in Mesopotamia and, after kill ing many 
of his companions, captured him and slew hi m.
  At this juncture Constantine invaded Syria and Doulichia and 
captured Germanikeia, taking advantage of the internecine war among 
the Arabs. The Arabs who lived in those parts he sent off unarmed 
under a verbal assurance. He took along his maternal relatives and 
transferred them to Byzantium together with many Syrians, 
Monophysite heretics, most of whom have continued to live in Thrace 
to this very day and crucify the Trinity in the Trisagion in the manner of 
Peter the Fuller.
   From 10 to 15 August there was a misty darkness. At that time 
Marouam, after victoriously taking Emesa, killed all the relatives and 
freedmen of Isam. He also demolished the walls of Helioupolis, 
Damascus, and Jerusalem, put to death many powerful men, and 
maimed those remaining in the said cities.



(AM 6238, AD 745/6]
Constantine, 6th year 
Marouam, 3rd year 
Zacharias, 13th year 
Anastasios, 17th year 
Theophylaktos, 3rd year
In this year there was a great earthquake in Palestine, by the Jordan 
and in all of Syria on 18 January, in the 4th hour. Numberless 
multitudes perished, churches and monasteries collapsed, especially 
those in the desert of the Holy City.
  In the same year a pestilence that had started in Sicily and Calabria 
travelled like a spreading fire all through the 14th indiction to 
Monobasia, Hellas, and the adjoining islands, thus 423 scourging in 
advance the impious Constantine and restraining his fury against the 
Church and the holy icons, even though he remained unrepentant like 
Pharaoh of old. This disease of the bubonic plague spread to the 
Imperial City in the 15th indiction. All of a sudden, without visible 
cause, there appeared many oily crosslets upon men's garments, on the 
altar cloths of churches, and on hangings. The mysteriousness of this 
presage inspired great sorrow and despondency among the people. 
Then God's wrath started destroying not only the inhabitants of the City, 
but also those of all its outskirts. Many men had hallucinations and, being 
in ecstasy, imagined to be in the company of certain strangers of terrible 
aspect who, as it were, addressed in friendly fashion those they met and 
conversed with them. Taking note of their conversation, they later 
reported it. They also saw the same men entering houses, killing some 
of the inmates, and wounding others with the sword. Most of what 
they said came to pass just as they had seen it.
  In the spring of the 1st indiction the plague intensified and in the 
summer it flared up all at once so that entire households were 
completely shut up and there was no one to bury the dead. Because of 
extreme necessity a way was devised of placing planks upon animals 
saddled with four panniers each and so removing the dead or piling 
them likewise one upon the other in carts. When all the urban and
585




suburban cemeteries had been filled as well as empty cisterns and 
ditches, and many vineyards had been dug up and even the orchards 
within the old walls  to make room for the burial of human bodies,
424 only then was the need satisfied. When every household had been 
destroyed by this calamity on account of the impious removal of the holy 
icons by the rulers, straight away the fleet of the Hagarenes sailed 
from Alexandria to Cyprus, where the Roman fleet happened to be. The 
strategos of the Kibyraiots fell upon them suddenly in the harbour of 
Keramaia and seized the mouth of the harbour. Out of 1,000 dromones it 
is said that only three escaped.li b





Constantine, 7th year 
Marouam, 4th year 
Zacharias, 14th year 
Anastasios, 18th year 
Theophylaktos, 4th year
In this year Gregory was killed by the Arourites and Marouam, the Arab 
leader, was victorious as I have already said.



586

[AM 6240, AD 747/8)
Constantine, 8th year 
Marouam, 5th year Zacharias, 
15th year Anastasios, 19th 
year Theophylaktos, 5th year
In this year a people called the Chorasanite Maurophoroi rose up in the 
eastern part of Persia against Marouam and the entire clan that had ruled from 
the time of Mouamed, the false prophet, down to that same Marouam, that is 
the so called progeny of Oumaia. For while the latter were busy fighting one 
another after the murder of Oualid, the sons of Echim and of Alim (as they are 
called), who were likewise related to the false prophet, but were fugitives and 
lived in hiding in the Lesser Arabia, gathered together under the leadership 
of Abraim and dispatched a certain freedman of theirs named Aboumouslim  to 
some of the prominent men of Chorasan asking for armed help against 
Marouam. These banded together round a certain Chaktaban and, after 
taking counsel, incited slaves against their own masters and made great 
slaughter in one night; equipped with their victims' arms, horses, and money, 
they became powerful. They were divided into two tribes, the Kaisinoi and the 
lmanites. Judging the lmanites to be the stronger,
Aboumouslim incited them against the Kaisinoi and, after killing the latter 425
came to Persia together with Chaktaban. He made war on lbindara and captured all of his men, 
some 100,000 of them. He then moved against lbinoubeira, who was encamped with 200,000 
men and undid him also. Then, at the river Zabas, he overtook Marouam, who had 300,000 
men, made war on him, and slew an infinite multitude. One could then see one man chasing 
a thousand and two men driving ten thousand, as Scripture says. When Marouam had 
observed that those men were winning signal victories, he went to Harran and, after crossing 
the river, cut the bridge which was made of boats. Taking all the money, his household, as 
well as 3,000 servants, he fled to Egypt.



Constantine, 9th year 
Marouam, 6th year Zacharias, 
16th year Anastasios, 20th year 
Theophylaktos, 6th year
In this year Marouam was pursued by the Maurophoroi, who captured 
him and killed him after waging a very heavy war. They were 
commanded by Salim, son of Alim, one of the aforementioned fugitives 
who had sent Aboumouslim on his mission. The rest of them gathered in 
Samaria and Trachonitis and awarded their leadership by lot to 
Aboulabas, and next to him to his brother Abdela, and next to the latter to 
lse lbinmouse. They appointed Abdela, son of Alim and brother of Salim, 
to be commander in Syria; Salim himself to be commander in Egypt; 
while Abdela, brother of Aboulabas (from whom he received the 
nomination to the command) they appointed over Mesopotamia. 
Aboulabas himself, who was in supreme authority, established his seat 
in Persia, the government and all the seized treasure (which Marouam 
had carried away) having been transferred to him
426	and his Persian allies from Damascus. Marouam's surviving sons and
relatives went from Egypt to Africa, whence they crossed the narrow 
sea that separates Libya from Europe next to the Ocean at a place 
called Septai and settled until this day in Spain of Europe, where some 
kinsmen and coreligionists of theirs had come to dwell at an earlier time 
the latter being descendants of Mauias who had suffered shipwreck 
there. The devastation in the days of Marouam lasted six years and in the 
course of it all the prominent cities of Syria lost their walls except 
Antioch, which he planned to use as a refuge. Innumerable Arabs were 
also killed by him for he was very cunning in civil matters. He belonged 
to the heresy of the Epicureans, that is Automatists, an impiety he had 
imbued from the pagans who dwell at Harran.
On 25 January of the same 3rd indiction a son was born to the
588



emperor Constantine by the daughter of the Chagan of Chazaria and he 
called him Leo. In the same year there was an earthquake and terrible 
destruction in Syria, as a result of which some cities were entirely 
destroyed, others partially so, while others slid down entire, with their 
walls and houses, from positions on mountains to low lying plains, a 
distance of six miles or thereabout. Eyewitnesses affirmed that the ground 
in Mesopotamia was split along two miles and that out of the chasm was 
thrown up a different soil, very white and sandy, in the midst of which, 
they said, there came up an animal like a mule, quite spotless, that spoke 
in a human voice and announced the incursion of a certain nation from 
the desert against the Arabs, which indeed came to pass.
  The next year, in the 4th indiction, on the feast of holy Pentecost the 
impious emperor Constantine conferred the imperial crown on his son 
Leo by the hand of the false patriarch Anastasios who shared his views.


(AM 6242, AD 749/50)
Constantine, 10th year
Mouamed, leader of the Arabs (5 years), 1st year 
Zacharias, 17th year

Anastasios, 21st year Theophylaktos, 
7th year
In this year the inhabitants of Chalkis rose up against the Maurophoroi 
Persians and 4,000 of them were killed in the territory of Emesa. The same 
happened in Arabia to the Kaisinoi at the hands of the same Persians. Most of 
the rebellions ceased on the arrival of Marouam's embalmed head. In the 
same year the most holy patriarch of Antioch Theophylaktos died on the 29th 
of the month Daisios.




Constantine, 11th year 
Mouamed, 2nd year 
Zacharias, 18th year 
Anastasios, 22nd year
Theodore, bishop of Antioch (6 years), 1st year
In this year the new masters slew the greater part of the Christians, whom 
they treacherously arrested at Antipatris in Palestine, because of their being 
related to the previous rulers. In the same year Constantine occupied 
Theodosioupolis as well as Melitene and conquered the Armenians. Theodore, 
son of Vikarios, a native of the Lesser Arabia, was ordained patriarch of 
Antioch.

590



Constantine, 12th year 
Mouamed, 3rd year 
Zacharias, 19th year 
Anastasios, 23rd year 
Theodore, 2nd year
In this year the impious Constantine, puffed up in his spirit and 
making many plans against the Church and the orthodox faith, held 
audiences every day and treacherously urged the people to follow his 
designs, thus paving the way to the complete impiety that was later to 
overtake him.




Constantine, 13th year 
Mouamed, 4th year 
Zacharias, 20th year 
Anastasios, 24th year 
Theodore, 3rd year
   In this year Anastasios, who had held in unholy fashion the 
episcopal throne of Constantinople, died a spiritual as well as a 
bodily death of a dreadful disease of the guts after vomiting dung 
through his mouth, a just punishment for his daring deeds against 
God and his teacher. In the same year the impious Constantine 
convened in the palace of Hiereia an illegal assembly of 338 bishops 
against the holy and venerable icons under the leadership of 
Theodosios of Ephesos, son of Apsimaros, and of Pastillas of Perge. 
These men by themselves decreed whatever came into their heads, 
though none of the universal sees was represented, namely those of 
Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem. Starting on 10 428   
February, they went on until 8 August of the same 7th indiction. On 
the latter day the enemies of the Theotokos having come to 
Blachernai, Constantine ascended the ambo holding the monk 
Constantine, former bishop of Syllaion, and, after reciting a prayer, 
said in a loud voice, 'Long live Constantine, the ecumenical 
patriarch!' On the
591
	

27th of the same month the emperor went up to the Forum together 
with the unholy bishop Constantine and the other bishops and they 
proclaimed their misguided heresy in front of all the people after 
anathematizing the most holy Germanus, George of Cyprus, and John 
Damascene of the Golden Stream, son of Mansour, holy men and 
venerable teachers.





Constantine, 14th year 
Mouamed, 5th year 
Zacharias, 21st year
Constantine, bishop of Constantinople (12 years), 1st year Theodore, 
4th year
In this year Mouamed, also called Aboulabas, died after a reign of five 
years. His brother Abdelas, who was then at Mecca (the place of their 
blasphemy), wrote to Aboumouslim, who was in Persia, to guard the 
throne for him as it had been allotted. Now Aboumouslim, on being 
informed that Abdelas, son of Alim and brother of Salim, sole 
commander of Syria, was seeking the kingship and marching to take 
possession of Persia; furthermore, that he was hostile to the Persians 
and friendly to the Syrians who supported him, roused his army and 
engaged him at Nisibis. Having vanquished him, Aboumouslim killed 
many men, most of whom were Slavs and Antiochenes. Abdelas, who 
alone escaped, sought a few days later a pledge from the other 
Abdelas, Mouamed's brother, who in great haste had arrived in Persia 
from Mecca. The latter, however, confined him in a ramshackle hut
29	whose foundations he ordered to be dug up and so killed him by
592


stealth. Now Aboumouslim was incensed at the Syrian Arabs for having 
rebelled against the Maurophoroi and taken many captives in Palestine, 
Emesa, and on the seacoast, and was intending to attack them with his army, 
but Abdelas held him back. The other, furious at Abdelas, withdrew with his 
host to inner Persia. Being very much afraid of him, Abdelas called him back 
by means of plausible excuses and entreaties, even with the help of the 
abominable symbols of their kingship, I mean the staff and sandals of the 
false prophet Mouamed asking him to turn aside the distance of one day's 
journey in his direction that he might pay him the gratitude due to a father. 
Thus deceived, Aboumouslim arrived with 100,000 horsemen and, when he 
had joined Abdelas, the latter killed him with his own hands. The army 
immediately scattered and departed after receiving considerable largess. 
In this manner Abdelas achieved the kingship.



(AM 6247, AD 754/5)
Constantine, 15th year
Abdelas, leader of the Arabs (2 1 years), 1st year  Paul, 
bishop of Rome (7 years), 1st year Constantine, 2nd 
year
Theodore, 5th year
In this year Niketas of Helioupolis was anathematized by the whole 
Church.
  The emperor Constantine transferred to Thrace the Syrians and 
Armenians whom he had brought from Theodosioupolis and Melitene and, 
through them, the heresy of the Paulicians spread about. Likewise in the 
City, whose inhabitants had been reduced on account of the plague, he 
brought families from the islands, Hellas, and the southern parts and made 
them dwell in the City so as to increase the population. The same year 
the Bulgarians asked for tribute because of the forts that had been built, 
and when the emperor had treated their emissary dishonorably, they made 
a military expedition and came as far as the Long Walls in an advance on
593



the Imperial City. After causing much destruction and taking many 
prisoners, they returned home unharmed.


430	(AM 6248, AD 755/6)
Constantine, 16th 
year Abdelas, 2nd 
year
Paul, 2nd year 
Constantine, 3rd year
In this year, on 9 March, there occurred a considerable earthquake in 
Palestine and Syria. Theodore, patriarch of Antioch, was exiled 
because of the malice of the Arabs, having been accused of frequently 
communicating Arab affairs by letter to the emperor Constantine. And 
so, Salim himself banished him to the land of Moab which was his 
native country. The same Salim decreed that no new churches should 
be built, that crosses should not be displayed and that Christians 
should not discourse with Arabs on matters of religion. He invaded the 
Roman country with a force of 80,000 and, when he had come to 
Cappadocia, he heard that Constantine was taking up arms against 
him. Taking fright, he returned empty handed without causing any 
damage, except that he took a few Armenians who had joined him.

594




Constantine, 17th year 
Abdelas, 3rd year
Paul, 3rd year Constantine, 
4th year
In this year Abdelas intensified the taxation of Christians, so much so that he 
laid taxes on all monks, solitaries, and stylites who led lives pleasing to God. 
He also put under seals the treasuries of churches and brought Jews to sell 
their contents and these were bought by freedmen.


(AM 6250, AD 757/8)
Constantine, 18th year 
Abdelas, 4th year
Paul, 4th year Constantine, 5th 
year
In this year Constantine conquered the Sklavinias in Macedonia and subjected 
the rest. 
  The same year some of the Persian Maurophoroi who were of the 
Magian religion were deceived by the Devil: after selling their possessions, 
they went up naked on the walls and threw themselves down, believing that 
they would fly up to heaven. But having no appreciable share of the 
heavenly kingdom, they returned to earth and broke their limbs. The leaders 
of their error, who were sixteen in number, were put to death at Beroia and 
Chalkis by Abdelas acting through Salim.



595




Constantine, 19th year 
Abdelas, 5th year
Paul, 5th year Constantine, 
6th year
431 In this year the Arabs maliciously expelled the Christians from government 
chanceries for a short time, but were once again obliged to entrust the 
same duties to them because they were unable to write numbers.
  The Arabs invaded the Roman country and took many prisoners.
They killed Paul, strategos of the Armeniacs, along with many of his 
soldiers, whom they fought at the river Melas, and captured forty two 
prominent men and many officers.
  The emperor invaded Bulgaria. When he had come to the pass of 
Beregaba, the Bulgarians encountered him and killed many of his men, 
among them Leo, patrician and strategos of the Thrakesians, another Leo 
who was logothete of the Course, as well as numerous soldiers whose 
arms they took. And so he returned ingloriously.

[AM 6252, AD 759/60]
Constantine, 20th year 
Abdelas, 6th year
Paul, 6th year Constantine, 
7th year
In this year there was an error concerning the date of Easter and, whereas 
the eastern orthodox celebrated Easter on 6 April, the misguided heretics 
did so on the 13th.
  In the same year the head of St John the Forerunner and Baptist was 
translated from the monastery of the Cave to his splendid church in the city 
of Emesa and a crypt was built, wherein to this very day it is worshipped by 
the faithful and honoured with both material and spiritual
596



incense while it pours cures upon all who come to it in a spirit of faith.
  In the same year a very bright comet appeared for ten days in the 
east and another twenty one days in the west. 
  A certain Theodore, a Lebanese Syrian, rose up against the Arabs in 
the territory of Helioupolis, which adjoins the Lebanon, and fought them: 
many were killed on both sides. In the end he was routed and fled and 
all his Lebanese companions were slain.
  In Africa there was disorder and war following an eclipse of the sun 
on 15 August, a Saturday, at the 10th hour.
  Some of the Maurophoroi rose up at Dabekon proclaiming the 
Caliph's son to be a god inasmuch as he was their provider, a doctrine 
they made public. The Maurophoroi entered the house of their error 
and killed the key bearers who numbered sixty. Some of them went 
forth to Basrason, took many captives, and a big sum of money.




Constantine, 21st year Abdelas, 
7th year
Paul, 7th year Constantine, 8th 
year
In this year the Kasiotai rebelled against the Maurophoroi on account of their 
women. For a number of them lived in a house wherein three brothers also 
dwelt and they wanted to drown their wives. So the three
597
432



brothers rose up, killed them, and buried them. Their companions 
assembled and killed the rest. Then Selichos sent out his troops, who came 
upon them by deceit, captured them, hanged the three brothers and killed 
many others. On the feast of Easter he entered the church during holy 
service, and as the metropolitan was standing by and saying loudly the 
words, 'For Thy people and Thy Church entreat Thee', they took him out 
and confined him in a prison, and another completed the holy service. 
There ensued great fear. Had not the metropolitan assuaged him by mea ns 
of tactful behaviour and humble words, great evil would have been done 
at that time. It was the most blessed Anastasios. 
  In the same year Constantine the persecutor killed by scourging in the 
Hippodrome of St Mamas the illustrious monk Andrew, surnamed 
Kalybites, who practised at Blachernai, because the latter had reproved his 
impiety and called him a second Valens and a second Julian. The emperor 
ordered him to be thrown in the Bosporus, but his sisters snatched him away 
and buried him at the trading post of Leukadios. 





Constantine, 22nd year Abdelas, 8th 
year
Constantine, bishop of Rome (5 years), 1st year 
Constantine, 9th year

  In this year a comet appeared in the east and Fatima's son was 
killed.
  The Bulgarians rose up, killed their hereditary lords and set up as 
their king an evil minded man called Teletzes who was 30 years old. 
Many Slavs escaped and joined the emperor, who settled them on the 
Artanas. On 16 June the emperor marched into Thrace after 
dispatching a fleet by way of the Black Sea, as many as 800   433 
chelandia, each carrying 12 horses. When Teletzes had heard of the 
expedition against him both by land and by sea, he recruited 20,000 men 
among the neighbouring nations to fight on his side and, after 
stationing them at the fortifications, made himself secure. The emperor, 
for his part, encamped in the plain of Anchialos. On 30 June of the 1st 
indiction, a Thursday, Teletzes came marching with a multitude of 
nations and, battle having been joined, there was mutual slaughter for 
a long time. Teletzes was routed and fled. The battle lasted from the 
5th hour until evening. Great numbers of Bulgarians were killed, many 
were captured, and others deserted. Elated by this victory, the emperor 
celebrated a triumph in the City, which he entered in full armour 
together with his army to the acclamations of the demes, dragging the 
Bulgarian captives in wooden fetters. The latter he ordered to be 
beheaded by the citizens outside the Golden Gate. The Bulgarians rose 
in rebellion, killed Teletzes together with his chieftains, and set up as 
their king Sabinos, the brother in law of their former lord, Kormesios. 
When Sabinos had straight away sent an embassy to the emperor 
seeking to make peace, the Bulgarians called a meeting and opposed 
him strenuously, saying, 'On your account Bulgaria is about to be 
enslaved by the Romans.' A rebellion having ensued, Sabinos fled to 
the fort of Mesembria and went over to the emperor. The Bulgarians 
set up another lord over themselves by the name of Paganos.

599




Constantine, 23rd year 
Abdelas, 9th year 
Constantine, 2nd year 
Constantine, 10th year
In this year the inhabitants of the desert and of Basrathon rebel led 
against Abdelas under the leadership of two brothers against whom he 
sent [an army] and killed them along with 80,000 soldiers. In the 
same year the Turks went out of the Caspian Gates, killed many 
people in Armenia, took many captives, and returned home.
  A certain Kosmas surnamed Komanites, bishop of Epiphaneia (in 
the region of Apameia in Syria), on being accused by the citizens of 
Epiphaneia before Theodore, patriarch of Antioch, concern ing the 
alienation of consecrated objects, and being unable to make them 
good, renounced the orthodox faith and gave h is adherence to
434 Constantine's heresy directed against the holy icons. By common 
consent, Theodore, patriarch of Antioch, Theodore of Jerusalem, and 
Kosmas of Alexandria, together with their suffragan bishops, 
unanimously anathematized him on the day of holy Pentecost after the 
reading of the holy Gospel, each in his own city.
  In the same year, starting in early October, there was very bitter cold, 
not only in our land, but even more so to the east, the north, and the 
west, so that on the north coast of the Pontos to a distance of 100 miles 
the sea froze from the cold to a depth of thirty cubits. The same 
happened from Zigchia to the Danube, including the river Kouphis, the 
Danastris, the Danapris, and Nekropelai, and the rest of the coast as far 
as Mesembria and Medeia. All this ice was snowed upon and grew by 
another twenty cubits, so that the sea became indistinguishable from 
land: upon this ice wild men and tame animals could walk from the 
direction of Chazaria, Bulgaria, and other adjoining countries. In the 
month of February of the same 2nd indiction this ice was, by God's 
command, split up into many different mountain like sections which 
were carried down by the force of the winds to Daphnousia and Hieron 
and, by way of the

Straits, reached the City and filled the whole coast as far as the 
Propontis, the islands, and Abydos. Of this I was myself an eyewitness, 
for I climbed on one of those [icebergs] and played on it together 
with some thirty boys of the same age. Some of my wild and tame 
animals also died. Anyone who so wished could walk without 
hindrance as on dry land from Sophianai to the City and from 
Chrysopolis to St Mamas and to Galata. One of the icebergs struck the 
jetty of the Acropolis and crushed it. Another huge one struck the wall 
and shook it greatly so that the houses on the inside partook
of the quake. It then broke into three pieces and ringed the City from 435
the Mangana to the Bosporus, rising in height above the walls. All the 
inhabitants of the City, men, women, and children, ceaselessly 
watched these things and would return home with lamentation and 
tears, not knowing what to say.
  In the same year, in the month of March the stars were seen falling 
from heaven all at once, so that all the observers thought it was the 
end of the present world. Then there was a great drought, so much so 
that sources dried up. The emperor summoned the patriarch and said 
to him: 'What harm is there if we call the Mother of God Mother of 
Christ?' The other embraced him and said: 'Have mercy, 0 lord! May 
not this statement come even to your mind. Don't you see how much 
Nestorios is held up to public scorn and anathematized by the whole 
Church?' The emperor replied: 'I have asked you for my own 
information. Keep it to yourself.' 





Year of the divine Incarnation 756
Constantine, emperor of the Romans (35 years), 24th year 
Abdelas, leader of the Arabs (21 years), 10th year Constantine, 
bishop of Rome (5 years), 3rd year Constantine; bishop of 
Constantinople (12 years), 11th year
In this year the Turks went forth again to the Caspian Gates and to Iberia. 
They fought the Arabs and there were many casualties on both sides. 
  As for Abdelas, he used the following ruse to remove from power lse 
lbinmouse who, as we have said above, had received the third lot of ruling 
after him. Observing him to suffer from a migraine on one side of his head, 
which filled him with dizziness, he persuaded him that he

would be cured if he were injected in the nose with a sneezing drug 
that was prepared by his physician, a certain Moses (a deacon of the 
Church of Antioch), whom he had already bribed to concoct a very 
strong medicine that would also act as a potent narcotic. Thus 
convinced by Abdelas, the same lse, even though he took precautions 
not to eat with him for fear of a plot, received the nose medicine. 
Having
had the regions of his head injected and been deprived of his senses
	
43 6 and his reasonable faculties, he lay speechless. Then Abdelas called 
in
the leaders and prominent men of their race and said, 'What do you 
think about your future king?' They unanimously repudiated him and 
pledged themselves to the son of the same Abdelas, Mouamed, 
surnamed Madi. As for lse, they conveyed him to his house, 
senseless as he was. Three days later, when he had recovered, 
Abdelas consoled him with feigned excuses and repaid the injury with 
100 talents of gold.
  In the same year Paganos, the lord of Bulgaria, sent an emissary to 
the emperor requesting a personal meeting. Having received a 
pledge, he came down with his boyars. The emperor, having taken his 
seat and having Sabinos seated next to him, received them and 
reproved them for their disorderly conduct and their hatred for 
Sabinos. And so they made a semblance of peace. The emperor, 
however, sent a secret mission to Bulgaria and apprehended 
Sklavounos, chief of the Severi, who had caused much damage in 
Thrace. Also arrested was Christianos, a renegade from the Christian 
faith and leader of the Skamaroi. They amputated his arms and legs at 
the pier of St Thomas and, in the presence of physicians, dissected him 
alive from the genitals to the chest so as to comprehend the construction 
of the human body. Then they consigned him to the fire.
  Of a sudden the emperor left the City and, finding the passes 
unguarded because of the nominal peace, invaded Bulgaria as far as 
the Tounza. He set fire to the courts that he came across and returned 
in fear without having accomplished any brave deed.






Constantine, 25th year 
Abdelas, 11th year 
Constantine, 4th year 
Constantine, 12th year
   In this year, on 20 November of the 4th indiction, the impious and 
unholy emperor, becoming enraged at all Godfearing people, 
commanded that Stephen, the new Protomartyr (who was a recluse at 
St
437 Auxentios, the mountain close to Damatrys) should be dragged in the 
street. Having apprehended him, the scholarii and members of the 
other tagmata (who partook of the emperor's boorishness and shared 
his views) tied a cord to one of his feet and dragged him off from the 
Praetorium to the quarter of Pelagios, where they broke him apart and 
threw his venerable remains in the ditch of executed criminals because 
he had admonished many people to enter the monastic life and had 
persuaded them to scorn imperial dignities and moneys. This man was 
venerated by all because he had spent about sixty years in his 
hermitage and shone with many virtues. The emperor also inflicted 
various punishments and cruel tortures on many officers and soldiers 
who had been traduced for worshipping icons. He imposed a general 
oath on all the subjects of his empire that no one would worship an 
icon. Furthermore, he caused the false patriarch Constantine to mount 
the ambo, raise the holy life giving Cross, and swear that he was not a 
worshipper of icons. Straight away he persuaded him to assume a 
clerical instead of a monastic tonsure, to partake of meat, and to put up 
with either
604


music at the imperial table. It was not long, however, before divine 
Justice delivered him into the murderer's hands.
  On 21 June of the 4th indiction the emperor set out against the 
Bulgarians and dispatched to Achelos 2,600 chelandia which he 
equipped with contingents drawn from all the themata. When these had 
been beached along the shore, a north wind blew and nearly all of them 
were smashed. So many men were drowned that the emperor ordered 
fishing nets to be extended to collect and bury the dead. On I7 July he 
returned ignominiously to the City.
  On 21 August of the same 4th indiction he held up to public scorn 
and dishonour the monastic habit in the Hippodrome by ordering
that each monk hold a woman by the hand and so process through   438 
the Hippodrome while being spat upon and insulted by all the people. And 
likewise on the 25th of the same month nineteen prominent dignitaries 
were brought to the Hippodrome and paraded for having made evil designs 
on the emperor. They had been falsely accused, but, in fact, the emperor 
bore them a grudge because they were handsome and strong and were praised 
by everyone; and some of them because of their piety and for resorting to 
the aforementioned recluse whose sufferings they proclaimed in public. 
These men he killed, the foremost among them being Constantine, patrician 
and former logothete of the Course, whom he nicknamed Podopagouros; his 
brother Strategios, spatharios and domestic of the excubitors; Antiochos, 
former logothete of the Course and strategos of Sicily; David, follower of 
Beser, spatharios and comes of Opsikion; Theophylaktos of Ikonion, 
protospatharios and strategos of Thrace; Christopher, follower of the 
patrician Himerios, a spatharios; Constantine, spatharios and imperial 
protostrator, son of the patrician Bardanes; Theophylaktos the candidatus, 
follower of Marinakes, and others. After exposing these men to scorn during 
the hippodrome games and causing them to be spat upon and cursed by all 
the people, he delivered his verdict. The two brothers, namely Constantine 
and Strategios, he beheaded at the Kynegion. There was much lamentation 
over them by all the people, so that when the emperor had been informed 
of it, he was annoyed and flogged the prefect Prokopios, whom he deprived 
of his office for having permitted this manifestation. All the others he 
blinded and exiled, and every year the madman ordered that emissaries should 
be sent to their respective places and give them a hundred lashes.
  On 30 August of the same 4th indiction he of the evil name 
became enraged at his namesake and sectary, the patriarch. He found 
some clergymen, monks, and laymen who were intimate friends of 
the latter and caused them to say, 'We have heard the patriarch
605
     speak to Podopagouros against the emperor.' He sent these men to 
439	the Patriarchate to cross examine him. As the latter was denying their 
charges, the emperor made them swear on the holy cross that
'We have heard this abuse from the patriarch.' Thereupon he sent his 
men to put the Patriarchate under seal, and the patriarch he banished 
first to Hiereia and then to Prinkipos.




606


Constantine, 26th year 
Abdelas, 12th year Constantine, 5th year
Niketas, bishop of Constantinople (14 years), 1st year
In this year Abdelas lbinalim died, the tower in wh ch he was 
imprisoned having collapsed on top of him. As for the Caliph Abdelas, 
he inflicted many evils on his Christian subjects, for he removed the 
crosses from churches, forbade night vigils and instruction in their own 
letters. The Arourites, as they are called among the Arabs (this means 
zealots), rebelled in the desert of Palmyra. The wickedness of those men 
towards God's churches is evident inasmuch as they are infidels; but the 
emperor of the Christians, perhaps by God's ineffable judgement (as in 
the case of the maniac Ahab who was king of Israel), manifested a fury 
much worse than that of the Arabs towards the orthodox bishops, 
monks, and laymen, those in authority as well as subjects that were in 
his dominion. Everywhere he rejected as being useless, both in writing 
and orally, the intercession of the holy Virgin, the Mother of God, and of 
all the saints, thanks to which all manner of help wells forth for us. He 
suppressed and obliterated their relics whenever it was said that those of 
some famous saint were reposing for the good of spiritual and bodily 
health and, as usual, were venerated by the faithful. Such men were 
straight away threatened with death for being irreligious, as well as with 
confiscation, banishment, and torture, while the God pleasing relic, like 
the treasure it was to its possessors, was removed and disappeared 
thenceforth. This the unholy emperor did to the most precious relic of the 
all praised martyr Euphemia which he cast into the sea together with its 
casket, for he could not suffer to behold her exuding myrrh in front of all 
the people and refuting his inanities directed against the intercession of 
the saints. God, however, who guards the bones of them that please Him 
(as Scripture saith) preserved it intact and manifested it once again on the 
440   island of Lemnos. By means of a nocturnal vision, He ordered it 
to be picked up where it lay and guarded. Under the pious Constantine 
and Irene, in the 4th indiction, it returned with due honour to her church 
which he, like the enemy of churches that he was, had profaned by 
turning it into an arms store and a dung heap, while they cleansed it and 
reconsecrated it so as to refute his godlessness and manifest their own 
godly piety. Twenty two years after the criminal's death I myself saw 
this wonderful and memorable miracle in the company of the most pious 
emperors and Tarasios the most holy patriarch
607

and, along with them, I kissed it, unworthy as I was to have been granted 
so signal a grace.
  On 16 November of the same 5th indiction the eunuch Niketas, a Slav, 
was unlawfully ordained by the emperor's decree patriarch of 
Constantinople. There ensued a drought, such that even dew did not 
fall from heaven and water entirely disappeared from the City. Cisterns 
and baths were put out of commission; even those springs that in 
former times had gushed continuously now failed. On seeing this, the 
emperor set about restoring Valentinian's aqueduct, which had 
functioned until Herakleios and had been destroyed by the Avars. He 
collected artisans from different places and brought from Asia and 
Pontos 1,000 masons and 200 plasterers, from Hellas and the islands 
500 clay workers, and from Thrace itself 5,000 laborers and 200 brick 
makers. He set taskmasters over them including one of the patricians. 
When the work had thus been completed, water flowed into the City.
  In the same 5th indiction he appointed several strategoi who shared 
his views and were suitable perpetrators of his wickedness, namely 
Michael Melissinos in the thema of the Anatolics, Michael 
Lachanodrakon in that of the Thrakesians, and Manes (homonym of 
madness) in that of the Bucellarii. Who would be able to recount their 
sacrilegious deeds, some of which we shall describe in their proper 
places? For if one were to set down all the deeds they
441 committed to win the emperor's favour, it is fair to say with the Gospel 
that the whole world would not contain the books that should be 
written concerning them.

608




Constantine, 27th year 
Abdelas, 13th year
Stephen, bishop of Rome (3 years), 1st year 
Niketas, 2nd year
   In this year, on 6 October, indiction 6, the false patriarch Constantine 
was brought from the island of Prinkipos and the tyrant Constantine had 
him scourged to the point that he was unable to walk. He ordered him to 
be carried in a cart and to go and sit in the solea of the Great Church. He 
was accompanied by an a secretis who held a volume of papyrus wherein 
were written the charges against him. When all the people of the City had 
been gathered there by imperial order and were looking on, the document 
was read out so everyone could hear it. And at every item the a secretis hit 
him in the face, while the patriarch Niketas was sitting in the synthronon 
and witnessing the scene. After this they brought him up on the ambo and 
set him up straight: Niketas took the document, sent bishops to remove 
Constantine's pallium, and anathematized him. And after calling him Dark 
face, they expelled him from the church facing backwards.
  The next day, when chariot races were to be run, they shaved his face, 
plucked his beard, the hair of his head, and of his eyebrows and, after 
putting on him a short sleeveless garment of silk, seated him backwards 
on a saddled ass and made him hold its tail; and so they brought him into 
the Hippodrome by way of the Diippion, while all
609



the people and the demes cursed him and spat on him. The ass was led 
by his nephew Constantine whose nose had been cut off. When he had 
come to the benches of the demes, they came down, spat on him, and 
kept throwing dust on him. Having brought him to the stama, they 
threw him off his ass and trampled on his neck; and after seating him 
opposite the benches of the demes, they made him
442 listen to derisory words until the end of the races. On the 15th of the 
same month the emperor sent his patricians to him with this message: 
'What do you say concerning our faith and the synod we have held?' 
His mind made vain, he replied: 'You believe rightly and you have 
held the synod rightly', thinking that he would thereby win the 
emperor's mercy once again. But they immediately replied: 'This is 
just what we wanted to hear from your foul mouth. Henceforth depart 
into the darkness and under anathema.' Having thus received the 
verdict, he was beheaded at the Kynegion. His head, tied by the ears, 
was hung for three days at the Milion so the people could see it; as 
for his body, they tied a cord to one foot and, after dragging it along 
the Mesê, threw it among the bodies of criminals in the quarter of 
Pelagios. Three days later they likewise threw his head in the same 
place. Oh, the senselessness, the cruelty, and mercilessness of the wild 
beast! Did not the wretch feel any respect for the holy font? For two 
of his children by his third wife did the patriarch take in his arms after 
baptism. At all times, however, he was ferocious and savage in his 
manner.
  From this time onwards he behaved with increased fury towards the 
holy churches. He sent his men to remove the celebrated stylite Peter 
from his rock and, since the latter did not yield to his doctrines, had 
him tied by the feet and ordered him, too, to be dragged alive along the 
Mesê and thrown in the ditch of Pelagios. Others he tied up in sacks 
which he weighted with stones and commanded to be cast in the sea, 
and he went on blinding, amputating noses, scourging, and inventing 
every kind of torment for the pious. In the City he perpetrated these 
things by himself and through those who shared his views, namely 
Antony, patrician and domestic of the Schools, the magistros Peter, 
and the men of the tagmata who had been instructed by him, while in 
the provincial themata he did so through the aforementioned 
strategoi. He himself delighted in music and banquets and educated his 
courtiers by means of foul language and dancing. And if anyone on 
falling down or being in pain let out the usual Christian exclamation, 
'Mother of God, help me!' or was convicted of attending night vigils or 
frequenting churches or living in piety without constantly using oaths, 
he was punished as
443	an enemy of the emperor and was called an 'unmentionable'. As
6ro

for monasteries built to the glory of God and as a refuge to those seeking 
salvation, he turned them into common barracks for the soldiers who shared 
his opinions. Thus he converted into a soldiers' dwelling the foremost 
koinobion of Byzantium, that of Dalmatos, while those named after 
Kallistratos, Dios, and Maximinus as well as other holy habitations of monks 
and virgins he completely demolished. Such men who had been prominent in 
government service or in office and had taken up the monastic life, especially 
those close to him who had been initiated into his unspeakable indecencies, 
he condemned to death, taking thought of the shame that would accrue to him 
from their confessions. For this reason, after he had befriended Strategios, 
the (brother) of Podopagouros, who was of attractive appearance (for he 
liked to have such intimates for the sake of his lewdness), but becoming 
aware that this man was repelled by his illicit homosexuality and was 
confessing it to the blessed Stephen (the hermit of St Auxentios) and 
receiving salutary treatment, he branded him as a traitor and killed him along 
with the hermit as has been said above.
  He also at this time made commodities cheap in the City. For, like a new 
Midas, he stored away the gold and denuded the peasants who, because of 
the exaction of taxes, were forced to sell God's bounty at a low price.
  In the same year the false patriarch Niketas scraped off the images in the 
small secretum of the Patriarchate, which were of mosaic, and those in the 
vault of the big secretum, which were in paint, he removed and plastered 
the faces of the other images. He did the same in the Abramiaion.
611




Constantine, 28th year 
Abdelas, 14th year 
Stephen, 2nd year 
Niketas, 3rd year
   In this year the thrice married emperor crowned his wife Eudokia as 
his third Augusta in the Tribunal of the Nineteen Couches on 1 April 
of the 7th indiction, a Saturday; and the two sons he had by
44 her, Christopher and Nikephoros, he appointed Caesars in the same 
Tribunal on the next day, which was 2 April and Easter Sunday. The 
prayer was recited by the patriarch and the emperor himself invested them 
with their mantles and their Caesars' crowns. He likewise
612


placed a golden mantle and a crown upon their youngest brother Niketas 
whom he appointed nobilissimus. The emperors then processed as far as 
the Great Church scattering largess in the form of newly minted tremisses, 
semisses, and nomismata.





Constantine, 29th year 
Abdelas, 15th year Stephen, 
3rd year Niketas, 4th year
In this year an exchange of prisoners took place in Syria, a man for a man 
and a woman for a woman and a child likewise for a child. Abdelas ordered 
that the men's beards should be shaved and that they should wear hats one 
and a half cubits high. All summer Abdelas besieged Kamachon with 80,000 
men, but he did not achieve any success and returned in shame.
  On 1 November of the 8th indiction Irene made her entrance from 
Athens. She came to the Imperial City from Hiereia, escorted by many 
dromones and chelandia decorated with silken cloths, and was met by 
the prominent men of the City and their wives who led the way before 
her. On the 3rd of the same month of November the patriarch went to the 
church of the Pharos in the palace and the betrothal of the emperor Leo 
to the same Irene was celebrated. On 17 December Irene was crowned 
empress in the hall of the Augusteus. She proceeded to the chapel of St 
Stephen in the Daphne and received the marital crown along with 
Constantine's son Leo.




Constantine, 30th year Abdelas, 
16th year
Adrian, bishop of Rome (27 years), 1st year 
Niketas, 5th year
In this year Banakas invaded the Roman country and made many 
captives.
445  The Roma ns overran the Fourth Armenia and devastated it. Salech 
died and the inhabitants of Germanikeia were transferred to 
Palestine.
  In the same year Lachanodrakon emulated his preceptor by gathering 
at Ephesos all the monks and nuns who were in the Thrakesian thema. He 
led them out to a plain called Tzoukanisterin and said to them: 'Whoever 
wishes to obey the emperor as well as us, let him put on a white 
garment and take a wife forthwith. Those who do not do so will be 
blinded and banished to Cyprus.' No sooner said than done, so that 
many proved to be martyrs on that day, while many others broke ranks 
and were damned; these the Dragon befriended.
  In the same 9th indiction, on 14 January a son was born to the 
emperor Leo and to Irene and was named Constantine while his 
grandfather Constantine was still alive.







Constantine, 31st year 
Abdelas, 17th year 
Adrian, 2nd year 
Niketas, 6th year
In this year Banakas invaded the Roman country and, after moving 
down from Isauria, laid siege to the fort Syke. When the emperor had 
heard of this, he wrote to Michael, strategos of the Anatolics, Manes, 
strategos of the Bucellarii, and Bardas, strategos of the Armeniacs. 
These men arrived and occupied the Arabs' exit, which was a very 
difficult mountain pass. Meanwhile the fleet of the Kibyraiots under 
their strategos the spatharios Petronas cast anchor in the harbour of the 
fort. On seeing this and losing all hope, Banakas encouraged and roused 
his men. He marched up to the cavalry themata and, with a great shout, 
routed them. He killed many of them and, after devastating all the 
surrounding country, returned home with much booty.
  In the same year Michael Lachanodrakon, strategos of the 
Thrakesians, sent out his notary Leo surnamed Kouloukes and Leo 
Koutzodaktylos, a former monk, and sold off all the male and female 
446   monasteries, all their holy vessels, books, and animals, and all 
their other possessions and paid their value to the emperor. Whatever 
books he found containing stories of monks and fathers of the desert 
he burnt. And whenever it appeared that anyone had a saint's relic as 
a phylactery, this, too, was consigned to the fire, while its possessor 
was punished for impiety. Many monks he killed by scourging, some 
by the sword, and a numberless multitude he blinded. In the case of 
some he smeared their chins with liquid wax and set fire to them so 
that their faces and heads were burnt, while others he subjected to 
many torments and then exiled. All in all, he did not leave in the 
whole thema that was under his authority a single man wearing the 
monastic habit. When the wicked emperor had heard of this, he wrote 
him a letter of thanks, saying: 'I have found in you a man after my 
own heart who carries out all my wishes.' The others, too, emulated 
him and committed similar deeds.
615


Constantine, 32nd year 
Abdelas, 18th year Adrian, 
3rd year Niketas, 7th year
In this year Abdelas sent Moualabitos to Africa at the head of a numerous 
army. Alfadal Badinar invaded the Roman country and took 500 prisoners, 
but the inhabitants of Mopsuestia encountered them in battle and killed 
1,000 Arabs. Abdelas went to Jerusalem for his fast and ordered that 
Christians and Jews should be marked on their hands. Many Christians fled 
to the Roman country by sea. Sergius Kourikos was apprehended outside 
Syke and Lacherbaphos, who was the representative of the local 
community, in Cyprus.




Constantine, 33rd year 
Abdelas, 19th year Adrian, 
4th year Niketas, 8th year
In this year, in the month of May, indiction I2, Constantine dispatched a fleet 
of 2,000 chelandia against Bulgaria. He himself
616



embarked in the red chelandia 2 and set out with the intention of 
entering the river Danube, leaving the strategoi of the cavalry themata 
outside the mountain passes in the hope that they might 447   
penetrate into Bulgaria while the Bulgarians were occupied with him. 
When, however, he had gone as far as Varna, he took fright and was 
considering a retreat. The Bulgarians, too, were frightened when they 
saw these things and sent a boyar and a Tzigatos to ask for peace. On 
beholding them, the emperor was overjoyed and made peace. They 
swore to one another that neither would the Bulgarians go forth 
against the Roman country nor would the emperor contrive to 
penetrate into Bulgaria, and they mutually drew up written 
instruments to that effect. The emperor returned to the City after 
leaving garrisons from all the themata in the forts he had built.
  In the month of October of the 11th indiction the emperor received 
a dispatch from his secret friends in Bulgaria to the effect that the lord 
of Bulgaria was sending an army of 12,000 and a number of boyars in 
order to capture Berzitia and transfer its inhabitants to Bulgaria. So as 
not to make it known that he was setting out against Bulgaria (seeing 
that emissaries of the lord of Bulgaria had come to him and were still 
in the City), he pretended to be undertaking an expedition against the 
Arabs and sent the standards and the imperial retinue across the 
Bosporus. When he had dismissed the emissaries and been informed by 
his spies of their departure, he raised his army and set out in all haste. 
He gathered the soldiers of the themata and the Thrakesians and joined 
the Optimati to the tagmata to a total of 80,000. He marched to a place 
called Lithosoria and, without sounding the bugles, fell upon the 
Bulgarians, whom he routed in a great victory. He returned with much 
booty and many captives and celebrated a triumph in the City, which he 
entered with due ceremony. He called this war a 'noble war' inasmuch 
as he had met with no resistance and there had been no slaughter or 
shedding of Christian blood.



[AM 6266, AD 773/4)
Constantine, 34th year 
Abdelas, 20th year 
Adrian, 5th year 
Niketas, 9th year
In this year 280 heads were brought from Africa and paraded in 
Syria. The emperor, who had already broken the peace with the 
Bulgars, once again fitted out a great fleet. He embarked in it 12,000 
cavalry
448 and sent along all the naval strategoi. He himself took fright and 
remained with the cavalry. When they had reached Mesembria, a 
strong wind blew. Nearly all the ships were smashed and many men 
perished. So he returned empty handed. Now Telerigos, the lord of 
Bulgaria, having ascertained that the emperor was being informed of 
his plans by his own friends, wrote to him saying: 'It is my intention 
to escape and come to you. Send me a promise of personal immunity 
and the names of your friends here that I may put my trust in them 
and that they may help me.' Naively, the emperor wrote those things 
to him and the latter, on being informed, killed the lot. When 
Constantine had heard of this, he plucked for a long time his grey 
hairs.

6 1 8



Constantine, 35th year 
Abdelas, 21st year 
Adrian, 6th year 
Niketas, 10th year
In this year, in the month of August of the 13th indiction, the emperor 
Constantine set out against the Bulgarians. God, however, struck him 
down: he became sorely afflicted with carbuncles on his legs and was on 
account of the extreme inflammation seized by a violent fever of a kind 
unknown to physicians. He returned to Arkadioupolis borne on the 
shoulders of his subjects in a litter. Having come to Selymbria he took 
ship and, on 14 September of the 14th indiction when he had reached the 
Round Castle he miserably died on board his chelandion as he was crying 
out 'I have been delivered to the unquenchable fire while still alive!'; and 
he demanded that hymns be sung to the holy Virgin, the Mother of God, 
whose implacable enemy he had been. He had reigned as sole emperor 
after his father's death 34 years, 2 months, and 26 days. Thus he ended 
his life, polluted as he was with much Christian blood with the invocation 
of demons to whom he sacrificed, with the persecution of the holy 
churches and of the true and immaculate faith, furthermore with the 
slaying of monks and the profanation of monasteries: in all manner of 
evil he had reached a pinnacle no less than Diocletian and the ancient 
tyrants. In the same month Abdelas, the ruler of the Arabs, also died. 
Thus the two wild beasts who had for a long time simultaneously 
devoured the human race died by Gods providence, and heir respective 
sons, Leo and Madi, acceded to power.
In the same year, too, Theodotos, king of the Lombards, came to the 
Imperial City and sought refuge with the emperor.
619



AM 6268 [AD 775/6)
Year of the divine Incarnation 768
Leo, emperor of the Romans (5 years), 1st year Madi, 
leader of the Arabs (9 years) 1st year Adrian, bishop of 
Rome (27 years), 7th year
Niketas, bishop of Constantinople (14 years), nth year
In this year Madi sent Abasbali at the head of a great force against the Roman 
country. With the help of smoke he opened the cave called Kasin and, after 
capturing the men who were in it, returned home.
  The emperor Leo started to lay his hands on the moneys that had
been left to him by his father and won favour with the people and the notables. 
For a short time he appeared to be pious and a friend of the holy Mother of God 
and of the monks; for which reason he appointed from among monks 
metropolitans of the foremost sees. He raised numerous contingents in each 
thema and increased the tagmata. As a result, all the commanders of the 
themata set out and entered Constantinople with a great throng of men to 
request that his son Constantine should be made emperor. He, on his part, 
replied according to imperial custom: 'My son is an only child and I am 
afraid of doing so lest I suffer the fate of all men and, while he is an infant, 
you put him to death and appoint another.' They testified under oath 
assuring him that they would not be ruled by anyone other than his son if 
God wanted him to die. From Palm Sunday
620
until Holy Thursday the people importuned him and gathered in the 
Hippodrome to make this request, and on Holy Friday he ordered 
them to take the oath. So all the people, namely those of the 
themata, the members of the Senate, the City tagmata, and all the 
citizens and artisans, swore on the holy and life giving Cross not to 
accept an emperor other than Leo and Constantine and their 
descendants, and they set down their oath in signed documents.
  The next day, which was Holy Saturday, the emperor went to the 
Tribunal of the Nineteen Couches and appointed his brother	450 Eudokimos nobilissimus; for Anthimos had been appointed in his father's lifetime. The emperor, together with the two Caesars, and
three nobilissimi and the young Constantine, processed to the Great 
Church and, after changing the altar cloth according to imperial custom, 
he mounted the ambo with his son and the patriarch. All the people 
entered the church and deposited their written declarations on the 
holy table. The emperor addressed them as follows: 'Behold, brethren, 
I am fulfilling your request and granting you my son as emperor. 
Behold, you are receiving him from the Church and from Christ's 
hand.' They cried out in a loud voice, saying: 'Be our surety, 0 Son of 
God, that we are receiving the lord Constantine as our emperor 
from Thy hand that we may guard him and die for his sake!'
  The next day which was Easter Sunday, (24 April), indiction 14, 
the emperor went to the Hippodrome at daybreak together with the 
patriarch. A portable altar having been brought, the patriarch recited 
the prayer in the presence of all the people and the emperor 
crowned his son. Then the two emperors processed to the Great 
Church together with the two Caesars and the three nobilissimi. 
After the emperors had gone forth, the empress Irene also processed, 
escorted by the scepters, by way of the Scholai and ascended the 
staircase of the Chalke to the gallery of the church without 
appearing in the colonnaded Mesê.
  In the month of May of the same indiction the emperor's brother 
the Caesar Nikephoros was denounced to the emperor for plotting 
against him together with certain spatharii, stratores, and other men 
in imperial service. The emperor convened a silentium at the 
Magnaura and referred to the people the reports concerning him. 
They cried out with one voice that all of them should be removed 
from their midst, forgetting (perjurers that they always were) the 
oath they had sworn to their father, namely that they would not 
suffer after his death that his children should be injured. The 
emperor had the conspirators scourged and tonsured and 451 banished 
them to Cherson and the Klimata under secure guard.
621




Leo, 2nd year Madi, 
2nd year Adrian, 8th 
year Niketas, 12th 
year
In this year Thoumamas, son of Baka, invaded the Roman country and 
returned after taking captives.
  Telerigos, lord of the Bulgarians, sought refuge with the emperor, who 
made him patrician and joined him in marriage to a cousin of his wife 
Irene. After he had been baptized, the emperor took him up from the 
holy font and bestowed upon him much honour and affection.


[AM 6270, AD 777/8)
Leo, 3rd year Madi, 
3rd year
622

Adrian, 9th year 
Niketas, 13th year
In this year Thoumamas established himself at Dabekon and raised a 
rebellion.
  The emperor Leo mobilized the Roman army: 100,000 men 
invaded Syria under the command of Michael Lachanodrakon of the 
Thrakesians, the Armenian Artabasdos of the Anatolics, Tatzates of 
the Bucellarii, Karisterotzes of the Armeniacs, and Gregory, son of 
Mousoulakios, of the Opsikians; and they surrounded Germanikeia. 
Isbaali, Madi's uncle, was there, and they took all his camels and 
were about to take Germanikeia itself, had not Isbaali prevailed 
upon Lachanodrakon by means of gifts to draw away from the 
fortified town; he went forth to devastate the countryside and, after 
capturing the heretical Syrian Jacobites, returned to the fort. 
Thoumamas sent an army and a number of emirs from Dabekon and 
made war on the Romans. It is said that five emirs and 2,000 Arabs 
fell. They withdrew on a Friday, having come on a Sunday.
  The emperor distributed rewards at Sophianai. He sat on a throne 
together with his son and the strategoi were given a triumph for 
their victory. He conveyed the Syrian heretics to Thrace and settled 
them there.

(AM 6271, AD 778/9)
Leo, 4th year 
Madi, 4th year

Adrian, 10st year 
Niketas, 14th year
In this year Madi, the leader of the Arabs, waxed angry and sent Asan with 
a great force of Maurophoroi, Syrians, and Mesopotamians and they 
advanced as far as Dorylaion. The emperor ordered the strategoi not to fight 
an open war, but to make the forts secure by stationing garrisons of soldiers 
in them. He appointed high ranking officers at each fort and instructed them 
to take each 3,000 chosen men and to follow the Arabs so as to prevent them 
from spreading out on pillaging raids, while burning in advance the horses' 
pasture and whatever other supplies were to be found. After the Arabs had 
remained fifteen days at Dorylaion, they ran short of necessities and their 
horses went hungry and many of them perished. Turning back, they 
besieged Amorion for one day, but finding it fortified and well armed, they 
withdrew without achieving any success.


(AM 6272, AD 779/80]
Leo, 5th year Madi, 
5th year Adrian, 11th 
year
Paul, bishop of Constantinople (5 years) 1st year
In this year Madi, the leader of the Arabs, came to Dabekon with a great armed force 
and sent his son Aaron against the Roman country, while he himself returned to the 
Holy City. He sent out Mouchesias surnamed the Zealot and gave him authority to 
convert the slaves of Christians and to ruin the holy churches. This man came as far as 
Emesa and announced that he would not oblige anyone except former infidels to become 
Muslim, anticipating the Jews and Christians to make themselves known. Then straight 
away he began torturing them in a godless manner, worse than Lysias and Agrikolaos of 
olden time, and many of them he destroyed. By the grace of Christ our God his fury was 
vanquished by some women who were, furthermore, newly baptized, namely the wives 
of the archdeacon of Emesa and of the son of Esaias. These endured many torments, but 
did not yield to impiety; for each of
624


them received a thousand lashes and was subjected to many other 
453 tortures and so obtained from Christ the crown of victory. The 
man in question went as far as Damascus and ruined many churches 
paying no heed to the promise that had been given to Christians by 
the Arabs.
  On 6 February of the 3rd indiction, the Sunday of Tyrophagy 
week, died the Slav eunuch Niketas, the patriarch of Constantinople. 
On the second Sunday of Lent the venerable Paul who was a lector, a 
Cypriot by origin, a man who excelled both in culture and in action, 
was under much duress ordained patriarch of Constantinople, after he 
had strenuously excused himself on account of the prevailing heresy.
  In the midweek of Lent James, who was protospatharios and 
papias, Strategios and Theophanes, who were cubicularii and 
parakoimomenoi, Leo and Thomas, who were likewise cubicularii, 
were arrested along with other pious men for worshipping holy icons. 
Baring at that moment his hidden wickedness, Leo, the persecutor's 
son, had them scourged and tonsured and, after parading them in 
chains through the Mesê, confined them in the Praetorium. 
Whereupon the said Theophanes died, thus becoming a confessor and 
winning the crown of martyrdom. All the others after his death 
became exemplary monks.
  Aaron, after invading the Armeniac thema, besieged all summer the 
fort Semalouos and in the month of September he took it by 
capitulation. He had previously sent Thoumamas to Asia with 501000 
men. A small raiding party of his was met by Michael 
Lachanodrakon, who gave battle and killed the brother of 
Thoumamas.
  On 8 September of the 4th indiction Constantine's son Leo died in 
the following manner. Being inordinately addicted to precious stones, 
he became enamored of the crown of the Great Church, which he 
took and wore on his head. His head developed carbuncles and, seized 
by a violent fever, he died after a reign of 5 years less 6 days.




Year of the divine Incarnation 773
Constantine, emperor of the Romans, together with his mother (10 years), 
1st year
Madi, leader of the Arabs (9 years), 6th year 
Adrian, bishop of Rome (27 years), 12th year
Paul, bishop of Constantinople (5 years), 2nd year
In this year, on 8 September of the 4th indiction, the most pious Irene 
together with her son Constantine were miraculously entrusted by God 
with the Empire so that in this matter also God might be glorified 
through a widow and her orphan son as He was about to overthrow 
the boundless impiety directed against Himself and His servants and 
the oppression of all the churches by God's adversary Constantine; just 
as aforetime He had overthrown the Devil by the weak hands of 
fishermen and illiterate folk. Forty days
626

after her succession, her son being 10 years old, certain dignitaries held 
counsel and decided to bring out the former Caesar Nikephoros and 
make him emperor. The plot was, however, exposed. Gregory, the 
logothete of the Course, Bardas, former strategos of the Armeniacs, 
Constantine, the son of Vikarios, who was spatharios and domestic of 
the excubitors, Theophylaktos, son of Rangabe, who was drungarius 
of the Dodecanese, were apprehended along with many others. Irene 
had them scourged and tonsured and banished them to different places. 
As for her brothers in law, the Caesars and nobilissimi, she made them 
take holy orders and administer communion to the people on the feast 
of Christ's Nativity; on which day she went in public imperial 
procession together with her son and offered to the church the crown 
that had been removed by her husband, which she had further adorned 
with pearls. She appointed the patrician Elpidios strategos of Sicily 
inasmuch as he had previously governed those parts and sent him out in 
the month of February. On 15 April Elpidios was denounced for 
being of the Caesars' party, so she dispatched the spatharios 
Theophilos with instructions to arrest him speedily and bring him 
back. When this man had gone there, the Sicilians did not surrender
Elpidios. Thereupon Irene had his wife and sons scourged and 45 5
Tonsured and imprisoned them in the Praetorium.
  In the month of June she sent all the Asiatic themata to guard the 
mountain passes and watch the Arab invasion under the command of 
the sakellarios John who was a eunuch of her household. Now Madi 
had sent Kebir at the head of a great force and an encounter took place 
at a spot called Melon. Battle having been joined, the Arabs were 
defeated with many losses and withdrew in shame.
  From that time on the pious began to speak freely. God's word 
spread about, those who sought salvation were able to renounce the 
world without hindrance, God's praises rose up to heaven, the 
monasteries recovered, and all good things were manifested. During this 
year a man who was digging by the Long Walls of Thrace found a coffin 
and, after cleaning it and removing its lid, he discovered a corpse 
inside and, engraved on the coffin, an inscription conceived as follows: 
'Christ will be born of the Virgin Mary and I believe in Him. 0 sun, 
you will see me again in the reign of Constantine and Irene.'
62
7




Constantine and Irene, 2nd year Madi, 
7th year
Adrian, 13th year Paul, 
3rd year
In this year Irene sent the sakellarios Konstaes and the primicerius 
Mamalos to Karoulos, king of the Franks, with a view to betrothing his 
daughter, called Erythro,1 to her son, the emperor Constantine. An 
agreement having been reached and oaths exchanged, they left the 
eunuch Elissaios, who was a notary, in order to teach Erythro Greek 
letters and language and educate her in the customs of the Roman 
Empire.
  Irene fitted out a big fleet with a picked force taken from the themata 
and a sufficient number of officers. She appointed the patrician Theodore, a 
eunuch and an energetic man, as commander and sent him to Sicily 
against Elpidios. After much fighting Theodore's men were victorious. 
On seeing this and taking fright, Elpidios took all the moneys he had as 
well as the dux Nikephoros and crossed to Africa, where he defected to 
the Arabs after receiving a promise of immunity. They received him and 
kept him as if he were emperor of
45 6	the Romans, having conferred an empty coronation on him and invested 
him with the red buskins and a crown.
While the Roman army was busy with these matters, Madi's son
628


Aaron sallied forth with an enormous armed force composed of 
Maurophoroi and men from all of Syria, Mesopotamia, and the desert and 
advanced as far as Chrysopolis after leaving Bounousos to besiege 
Nakoleia and guard his rear. He also sent Bourniche to Asia with a force of 
30,000. The latter gave battle to Lachanodrakon and the Thrakesian thema at 
a place called Darenos and, the Arabs being 30,000 strong, killed 15,000. The 
empress for her part sent the domesticus Antony at the head of the 
tagmata; he occupied Bane and blockaded the Arabs. But Tatzatios, 
strategos of the Bucellarii, defected to the Arabs because of his hatred 
towards the eunuch Staurakios, the patrician and logothete of the Course, 
who at that time was at the head of everything and administered all 
matters. On his advice the Arabs asked for peace. When Staurakios, the 
magistros Peter, and the domesticus Antony went forth on this mission, 
they did not take care to receive explicit promises and take the children of 
the Arab leaders as hostages. Instead, they went out heedlessly and were 
seized by them and put in chains. So both sides were obliged to make 
peace. The Augusta and Aaron exchanged many gifts and agreed that at 
stated times (tribute) should be paid to the Arabs. After peace had been 
concluded they departed, abandoning also the fort of Nakoleia. Tatzates 
took away his wife and all his possessions.





Constantine and Irene, 3rd year Madi, 
8th year
Adrian, 1 4th year 
Paul, 4th year
In this year Irene, after making peace with the Arabs and gaining a 
breathing space, sent Staurakios, the patrician and logothete of the 
swift Course, at the head of a numerous force against the Sklavinian 
tribes. He advanced to Thessalonica and Hellas, subdued all of them 
and made them pay tribute to the Empire. He even penetrated into
457	the Peloponnese and brought back many captives and much booty to the 
Roman Empire.




Constantine and Irene, 4th year Madi, 
9th year
Adrian, 15th year
Paul, 5th year

In this year, in the month of January of the 7th indiction, the said 
Staurakios returned from the Slavonian regions and celebrated his 
victory during the hippodrome games. In the month of May of the 
same 7th indiction the empress Irene together with her son and a 
numerous force went forth to Thrace, taking along organs and musical 
instruments. She advanced to Beroia, which she ordered to be rebuilt 
and called it Eirenoupolis. She also went as far as Philippoupolis with 
complete impunity and returned in peace after rebuilding Anchialos.
  In the same year Madi, son of Mouamed, the leader of the Arabs, died 
and his son Moses acceded to power.
  On 31 August of the same 7th indiction Paul, the venerable and 
most holy patriarch, fell ill and left his throne. He went to the 
monastery of Florus and took the monastic habit without informing the 
imperial government. When the empress had learnt of this, sorrowful as 
she was, she went to see him together with her son and cried in 
reproof, 'Why have you done this?' He replied with many tears, 
'Would that I had not sat at all on the throne of priesthood while 
God's Church was suffering oppression, separated as she was from the 
other catholic thrones and subject to anathema.' She summoned the 
patricians and the chief men of the Senate and sent them to hear his 
words. He said to them, 'Unless an ecumenical council takes place and 
the error that is in your midst is corrected, you will not find salvation.' 
They said to him, 'Why is it then that you subscribed at your ordination 
to not worshipping icons?' He replied, 'For this very reason I am weeping 
and have taken refuge in repentance, praying to God that He should 
not punish me as a priest who has remained silent until now and has 
not preached the truth from fear
of your fury.' At this juncture he died in peace to the great sorrow of 
458   the body politic, for the man was venerable, charitable beyond 
measure, and worthy of all respect. Both the public and the imperial 
government had great confidence in him. So from that time onwards the 
question of the holy icons began to be openly discussed and disputed by 
everyone.

631




Constantine and Irene, 5th year
 Moses, leader of the Arabs (1 year), 1st year 
 Adrian, 16th year
Tarasios, bishop of Constantinople (21 years), 1st year
In this year the empress Irene gathered all the people at the Maura and said to them, 
'You know, 0 brethren, what the patriarch has done. If he had been alive, we would 
not have acquiesced ill abandoning the episcopal throne even though he had taken 
monastic habit. Since, however, he has departed from this life ace ing to God's 
pleasure, let us take thought to find a man who is, to tend us like a shepherd and to 
fortify the Church with his wore instruction.' They all said unanimously that there was 
none o than Tarasios the a secretis. She said to them, 'We, too, cast our vote for him, 
but he is being disobedient. Let him explain why he is accepting the decision of our 
Majesty and of all the people.' So he offered his excuses to the people in the 
following words:
  'Our faithful emperors who guard our stainless Christian faith: and are zealous in 
promoting the glory of God, taking care as they do; of all things that please Him and 
are beneficial to us, especially those concerning the Church, have now, too, shown a 
diligent solicitude in taking thought of the appointment of a bishop in this their 
Imperial City. Wherefore, they have taken me to their pious mind and commanded 
me to declare openly their decision. Since, however, I have pronounced myself 
unworthy of this and have not given my consent inasmuch as I was unable to carry 
or to bear the yoke of the burden, they have commanded that I should be brought in 
front of you, since you, too, have acquiesced in this their purpose. So now,
459 O God fearing men who constantly carry Him in your hearts and bear the name 
of Christ our true God, I mean the name of Christians, hearken to a short speech of 
apology on the part of exiguous humility. For my part, as I have explained to our 
pious emperors who are orthodox in all respects and am further explaining in your 
presence, I am seized by fear to consent to this election and stand in dread before the 
face of God to hasten to it unprepared and without careful consideration lest I be liable to 
a terrible condemnation. For if the holy apostle Paul who had heard God's voice, who 
had been educated in heaven and had beheld paradise, who had hearkened to secret 
words and carried the name of God before nations and kings, said in writing to the 
Corinthians, "lest in preaching to others I prove myself unfit",  how can I who live in 
the world, who am numbered among laymen and enrolled in the imperial service

rush to the magnitude of the priesthood without examination and due 
circumspection? Such an undertaking would be fearsome com­pared to my 
exiguity; such a course would be indeed audacious. The cause of my fear and my 
refusal is the following. I behold and I see that the Church which is founded 
upon the rock, namely Christ our God, is now divided and tom asunder; that we 
at times speak in one manner while our fellow believers, the Christians of the 
East, speak differently and the westerners agree with them, whereas we are 
estranged from them all and are every day anathematized by them. A terrible 
thing is an anathema; it drives one far from God, it pushes one away from the 
kingdom of heaven and leads to the outer darkness. The Church in its rule and 
law does not recognize dissension or dispute, but just as it is wont to confess one 
baptism and one faith, so does it also confess a single consensus on all 
ecclesiastical matters. Nothing is so acceptable and agreeable to God as our 
being united and becoming one catholic Church, as, indeed, we confess in the 
symbol of our pure faith. Wherefore we ask, O brethren (and so, I believe, you 
do also since I know that you have the fear of God), that an ecumenical council 
be convened by our most pious and  orthodox emperors so that we, who belong 
to the one God, should be 460   made one; that we, who belong to the Trinity, 
should be united and be of one mind and of equal honour; that we, the one body 
of Christ who is our head, should be fitted and joined together; that we, who 
belong to the Holy Spirit, should stand by one another and not one against the 
other; that we, who belong to Truth, should believe and say the same things; so 
that there should not be a dispute and division among us, but that the peace of 
God that surpasses all understanding should guard all of us. And if our emperors, 
the protectors of orthodoxy, deign to approve of my request, I, too, give my 
consent to fulfill their command and I accept your election; but if not, I find it 
impossible to do so, lest I be subjected to anathema and appear condemned on 
the day of our Lord, the Judge of Righteousness, when neither emperor nor 
priest, neither dignitaries nor a crowd of men will be able to deliver me. 
Whatever your pleasure happens to be, 0 brethren, give an answer to my apology 
or, rather, to my request.'
Everyone listened gladly to these words and agreed that a synod should be held. 
Once again Tarasios addressed the people saying: 'The emperor Leo destroyed 
the icons and when the synod took place it found them destroyed. And since they 
have been destroyed by the hand of an emperor, the matter is again under 
investigation, namely that they dared, according to their whims, to abolish an 
ancient custom that had been handed down in the Church. But God's truth is not 
bound, as the apostle saith.'
  
  
  
  633
  
  
  

  On 25 December of the same 8th indiction our holy father 
Tarasios was ordained patriarch of Constantinople. He sent to Rome his 
synodic letters and a declaration of his faith and was recognized by 
Pope Adrian. The empress, too, sent word to the same pope asking him 
to dispatch letters and emissaries to be present at the synod. He sent 
Peter, the oikonomos of his church, and Peter, abbot of St Sabas, 
honorable men adorned with every virtue. The empress and the 
patriarch also sent word to Antioch and Alexandria,
461     for the peace with the Arabs had not yet been broken. From Antioch 
they brought that great man John, famous in word and deed, a holy 
man who had been synkellos of the patriarch of Antioch and from 
Alexandria Thomas, a zealous and most pious man who later 
distinguished himself as archbishop of Thessalonica, the great city of 
Illyricum. 10





Constantine and Irene, 6th year
Aaron, leader of the Arabs (23 years), 1st year 
Adrian, 17th year
Tarasios, 2nd year

In this year Moses, the leader of the Arabs, died and power was 
assumed by his brother Aaron, who inflicted many ills on the 
Christians.
  In the same year the emperors sent invitations to all the bishops 
subject to them, the letters and men who had been sent from Rome by 
Pope Adrian having arrived, as we have said, as well as those of the 
patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria. On 7 August of the 9th 
indiction they took their seats in the church of the Holy Apostles in 
the Imperial City and began reading out Holy Scripture and 
discussing with one another, while the emperors watched the 
proceedings from the gallery. Now the host of the scholarii and 
excubitors and of the other tagmata, at the instigation of their own 
officers (clinging as they did to the doctrine of their evil teacher), bared 
their swords and attacked them threatening to kill the archbishop as 
well as the orthodox bishops and abbots. When the empress attempted 
to restrain them through the men of her household who were present, 
they were not swayed, but added further insults. As the patriarch 
rose and entered the bema together with the orthodox bishops and 
monks, the bishops who shared the wicked views of the soldiers
went out to them shouting We have won! By Gods grace those  462 
inhuman madmen did not hurt anyone. The synod having been dissolved, 
everyone returned home.3



Constantine and Irene, 7th year Aaron, 
2nd year
Adrian, 18th year 
Tarasios, 3rd year
In this year, in the month of September at the beginning of the (10th) 
indiction, the empress sent Staurakios, the patrician and logothete, to 
Thrace to meet the Asiatic themata that were there at the time. He 
persuaded them to assist her in expelling from the City the impious 
host whom the iniquitous Constantine had enrolled and
6
3
5

educated. She pretended to be undertaking an expedition to the eastern parts as 
if the Arabs had invaded; and so all the imperial equipment and the tent were 
sent out to Malagina. The men of the provincial themata then entered the 
City and held it. Thereupon she sent word to the tagmata saying, 'Deliver to me 
your arms for I have no need of you.' They, made senseless by God, 
surrendered them. She then placed their families in boats and exiled them 
from the City, bidding each man go back to his native land. After forming her 
own army with officers who were obedient to her, in the month of May she 
once again sent messages to all parts inviting the bishops to present themselves 
at the city of Nicaea in Bithynia with a view to holding the synod there. All 
through the summer everyone gathered at Nicaea. As for the representatives 
from Rome and the East, she had not dismissed them, but had detained them.
  On 9 September of the l1th indiction, a Sunday, a considerable eclipse of the 
sun took place at the 5th hour of the day while holy liturgy was being 
performed.




Constantine and Irene, 8th year Aaron, 3rd 
year
Adrian, 19th year Tarasios, 
4th year
In this year Tarasios, the most holy patriarch of Constantinople, went to 
Nicaea and there was held the Seventh holy and ecumenical Synod consisting 
of 350 bishops. And so the catholic Church
636



regained her ancient adornment. The synod introduced no new doctrine, but 
maintained unshaken the doctrines of the holy and blessed Fathers; it rejected 
the new heresy and anathematized the three false	41 
patriarchs, namely Anastasios, Constantine, and Niketas and every­
one who shared their views. The first meeting and session of the bishops took 
place in the episcopal church of Nicaea, that of St Sophia, on 11 October of the 
11th indiction. In the month of November everyone entered the Imperial City. 
After the emperors and the bishops had taken their seats in the Magnaura, the 
decree was read out and signed by the emperor and his mother. When they had 
thus confirmed the true religion and the ancient doctrines of the holy Fathers, they 
rewarded the priests and dismissed them. And so God's Church found peace, even 
though the Enemy does not cease from sowing his tares among his own 
workmen; but God's Church when she is under attack always proves victorious.




Constantine and Irene, 9th year Aaron, 4th year
Adrian, 20th year Tarasios, 5th 
year
In this year an Arab raiding party went forth against the Roman country in the 
month of September and penetrated into the Anatolic thema, to a place called 
Kopidnadon. The Roman strategoi joined forces and gave battle to them. They 
were defeated and many were killed, including not a few of the exiled 
scholarii. Diogenes, the able turmarch of the Anatolics, also fell as well as the 
officers of Opsikion.
  The empress Irene broke her contract with the Franks and sent out the 
protospatharios Theophanes, who brought a maiden from the Armeniac parts, 
Maria of Amnia. She married her to her son, the emperor Constantine, who was 
unwilling and very distressed
because of his connection with the daughter of Karoulos, king of the 
Franks, to whom he had been previously betrothed. His wedding was 
celebrated in the month of November, indiction 12.
464 Philetos, strategos of Thrace, went off to the Strymon and encamped 
without due precaution. The Bulgarians suddenly fell on him, killing 
him and many others.
  Irene sent John, the sakellarios and logothete of the military chest, 
to Longobardia along with Theodotos, the former king of Greater 
Longobardia, to take measures, if possible, against Karoulos and 
detach from him some of his supporters. They went off together with 
Theodore, patrician and strategos of Sicily. Battle having been joined, 
the same John was captured by the Franks and put to a terrible death.





Constantine and Irene, 10st year 
Aaron, 5th year
Adrian, 21st year 
Tarasios, 6th year
In this year the Devil, grudging the emperors' piety, inspired certain 
evil men to set the mother against her son and the son against his 
mother. They persuaded her that they had been informed through 
prophecies to the effect that 'It is ordained by God that your son 
should not obtain the Empire, for it is yours, given to you by God.' 
Deceived, like the woman she was, and being also ambitious, she 
was satisfied that things were indeed so, and did not perceive that 
those men had offered the above pretext because they wanted to
638

administer the affairs of State. Now the emperor had reached the age of 
20; he was vigorous and very able and saw that he had no authority 
whatsoever. He was distressed to see that Staurakios, the patrician 
and logothete, had everything in his power and that everyone went up 
to him, while nobody dared consort with the emperor. After taking 
counsel with the men of his entourage, who were few, as well as with 
the magistros Peter, the patrician Theodore Kamoulianos, and the 
patrician Damian, he determined to arrest Staurakios and banish him 
to Sicily, whereupon he would assume the Empire together with his 
mother.
  On 9 February of the 13th indiction there occurred a terrible 
earthquake so that no one dared sleep indoors, but everyone dwelt in 
tents that they had set up in orchards and open courts. The empress, 
for her part, went out to St Mamas together with her son.
When Staurakios had been informed of this opportunity, he roused
	
465 the Augusta against her son. So she arrested the emperor's men, had
them all flogged and tonsured, together with his preceptor, the 
protospatharios John surnamed Pikridios, and exiled them to the 
southern parts, even as far as Sicily. The magistros Peter she 
subjected to dishonour and confined him to his house, and she did 
the same to the patrician Theodore Kamoulianos. As for the patrician 
Damian, she had him scourged and tonsured and banished him to 
the fort of Apollonias. She also flogged her son and, after addressing 
many reproaches to him, kept him confined for several days. She 
started to impose the following oath on the army, 'As long as you are 
alive we shall not suffer your son to rule.' Everyone swore those 
words and no one at all dared to object.
  An Arab fleet sailed to Cyprus. Forewarned of this, the empress, 
too, assembled all the Roman ships and sent them against the Arabs. 
When they had come to Myra, all the strategoi rounded cape 
Chelidonion and entered the gulf of Ataleia. The Arabs, for their 
part, set out from Cyprus and, the wind having dropped, they were 
carried about the sea. When they had come within sight of land, the 
strategoi saw them and drew up ready for battle. Now Theophilos, 
strategos of the Kibyraiots, a vigorous and very able man, boldly 
advanced in front of the others and, on joining battle, was captured by 
the Arabs. They took him to Aaron who saw him and urged him to 
become a traitor in return for transient liberalities. When he did not 
accept this and did not yield to further constraint, he was punished by 
the sword and so proved an excellent martyr.






Year of the divine Incarnation 783
Constantine, emperor of the Romans, (7 years), 1st year 
Aaron, leader of the Arabs (23 years), 6th year
Adrian, bishop of Rome (27 years), 22nd year
Tarasios, bishop of Constantinople (2 r years), 7th year
In this year, in the month of September, indiction 14, the men who were 
administering the oath came to the thema of the Armeniacs.
i66 The latter did not consent to swear, 'We shall not be ruled by your son as 
long as you are alive', [saying] 'We shall not even place the name of 
Irene before that of Constantine, but shall keep Constantine and Irene as 
we have accepted at the beginning.' The empress sent a second emissary 
to arrest them, namely Alexios surnamed Mousoulem, the spatharios 
and drungarios of the Watch. But they held him and appointed him 
their commander, while they imprisoned
640


the patrician Nikephoros, their own strategos, and acclaimed 
Constantine as sole emperor. When the men of the other themata had 
heard of this, they expelled their strategoi and they, too, proclaimed 
Constantine sole emperor. Oh, the wicked Devil's cunning! See how he 
hastens to destroy the human race by means of many machinations! 
For the same men who fifteen years earlier had sworn that terrible oath 
and made signed declarations which they deposited in the holy 
sanctuary, then swore to Irene that they would not be ruled by her son 
as long as she was alive. Once again, forgetting that, they acclaimed 
Constantine emperor, not understanding, wretches that they were, that 
they should not have taken contrary oaths; for it is inevitable that 
perjury should result from contrary oaths, and perjury is a denial of 
God.
  In the month of October of the 14th indiction the men of the 
themata gathered at Atroa and unanimously asked for the emperor 
Constantine who was then in his twentieth year. Being afraid of the 
impetus of the army, Irene let him go. They confirmed him as 
emperor and rejected his mother. Straight away the emperor sent 
Michael Lachanodrakon and his preceptor, the protospatharios John, 
and they made the Armeniacs swear that they would not accept his 
mother Irene as their emperor; and he confirmed Alexios as their 
strategos. When the emperor returned to the City in the month of 
December, he had Staurakios flogged and tonsured and exiled him to 
the thema of the Armeniacs that the latter might be satisfied. He also 
exiled the eunuch Aetios, the protospatharios, who was Irene's 467   
confidant, and all the other eunuchs of her household. As for her, he 
placed her in all security in the palace of Eleutherios,  which she had 
built and where she had hidden a great deal of money. In that same 
month there was a fire: the hall of the Patriarchate called Thomaites, 
the Quaestorium, and many other buildings as far as the Milion were 
burnt.
  In the month of April Constantine made an expedition against the 
Bulgarians and advanced to the fort Probaton by the stream of St 
George. He encountered Kardamos, the lord of Bulgaria, and, 
following a small engagement in the evening, the Romans, losing 
their courage, fled in the night and returned ingloriously. The 
Bulgarians, too, were frightened and withdrew.



Constantine, 2nd year 
Aaron, 7th year Adrian, 
23rd year Tarasios, 8th year
In this year, in the month of September, the emperor made an expedition 
against the Arabs. Setting out from Amorion, he made for Tarsos in 
Cilicia, but when he had come to the Waterless Towers, he turned back 
empty handed in the month of October, indiction 15.
  On 15 January, after receiving entreaties from his mother and many 
persons in authority, the emperor once again pronounced her empress and 
she was acclaimed along with him as in the beginning, 'Long live 
Constantine and Irene!' Everyone acquiesced in this, but the thema of the 
Armeniacs resisted and rebelled. They asked for Alexios, who a little 
earlier had been their strategos, and whom the emperor had at that time 
summoned under a verbal pledge, honoured with the rank of patrician, and 
kept in his presence. Because of the quest for him and certain rumors that 
were reported of him, namely that he would become emperor, he had him 
flogged and tonsured and confined him in the Praetorium.

  In the month of July he made an expedition against the Bulgarians 
and built up the fort of Markellai; and on 20 July Kardamos, the lord of 
Bulgaria, went forth with all his forces and stationed himself on the 
fortifications. Breathing hotly and persuaded by false prophets that 
victory would be his, the emperor joined battle without plan or order 
and was severely beaten. He fled back to the City having lost many 
men, not only ordinary soldiers, but also persons invested 468   with 
authority, among them the magistros Michael Lachanodrakon, the 
patrician Bardas, the protospatharios Stephen Chameas, the former 
strategoi Niketas and Theognostos, and many other men in imperial 
service as well as the false prophet, the astrologer Pankratios who had 
prophesied that he would win. The Bulgarians took the whole train, 
namely money, horses, and the emperor's tent with all his equipment. 
When the tagmata had assembled in the City, they decided to bring 
the former Caesar Nikephoros out of retirement and make him 
emperor. Informed of this, Constantine ordered that all the sons of his 
grandfather Constantine should be brought to St Mamas: he blinded 
Nikephoros and cut off the tongues of Christopher, Niketas, 
Anthimos, and Eudokimos. Along with them he blinded the 
aforementioned patrician Alexios, having been persuaded by the 
pleading of his mother and of Staurakios (the said patrician) that if he 
did not blind him they would elect him emperor. The punishment of 
those men took place in the month of August, on a Saturday, 
indiction 15, at the 9th hour. But not for long did God's judgement 
leave this unjust deed unavenged: for after a lapse of five years, in the 
same month and also on a Saturday the same Constantine was blinded 
by his own mother.




Constantine, 3rd year 
Aaron, 8th year Adrian, 
24th year Tarasios, 9th 
year
In this year the Armeniacs, having heard that the patrician Alexios had 
been blinded, imprisoned their strategos, the patrician Theodore 
Kamoulianos. On being informed of this, the emperor dispatched the 
protospatharios Constantine Artaser and Chrysocheres, strategos of the 
Bucellarii, with soldiers taken from the remaining themata in order to 
apprehend them. The latter gave battle, captured
469	both commanders and blinded them, and many were slain on both sides 
in the month of November of the 1st indiction.
  On 25 December, in the 2nd hour, as a result of a nocturnal 
thunderstorm, part of the imperial workshop of the embroiderers in 
gold thread situated at the Chrysion caught fire.
  After holy Easter the emperor, at the head of all the other themata, 
made an expedition against the Armeniacs. On 26 May of the 1st 
indiction, which was Pentecost Sunday, he engaged them in battle and, 
thanks to the deceit of the Armenians who were with them and who 
betrayed them, he captured them and put to death their turmarch, the 
spatharios Andronikos, the turmarch Theophilos, and Gregory, bishop 
of Sinope. The rest he subjected to fines and confiscation. A thousand 
men from their camp he put in chains and brought into the City through 
the Blachernai gate on 24 June, a Monday. He had their faces tattooed 
in ink with the words, 'Armeniac plotter'. He then dispersed them in 
Sicily and the other islands. As for the Armenians who betrayed them, 
since they received no reward from the emperor, they surrendered to 
the Arabs the fort of Kamachon. 


(AM 6286, AD 793/4)
Constantine, 4th year 
Aaron, 9th year Adrian, 
25th year Tarasios, 
10st year
In this year, in the month of October of the 2nd indiction, the Arabs took 
the fort of Thebasa by capitulation; for which reason they let its 
commanders depart home.




Constantine, 5th year 
Aaron, 10th year 
Adrian, 26th year 
Tarasios, 11th year
In this year the emperor, who had conceived an aversion towards his wife 
Maria through the machinations of his mother (for she was yearning 
for power and wanted him to be universally condemned), forced her to 
become a nun and, after obtaining her consent, had her tonsured in 
January of the 3rd indication. 
  In April he made an expedition against the Arabs. On 8 May he 
engaged an Arab raiding party at a place called Anousan; he defeated 
them and drove them as far as the river. He then went to Ephesos and, 
after praying in the church of the Evangelist, remitted the customs 
dues of the fair (which amounted to 100 lbs. of gold) in   470   order 
to win the favour of the holy apostle, the evangelist John. In August 
the emperor crowned the cubicularia Theodote as Augusta and 
betrothed himself to her illegally.



[AM 6288, AD 795/6)
Constantine, 6th year 
Aaron, 11th year Adrian, 
27th year Tarasios, 12th yea
In this year, in the month of September of the 4th indication, the emperor 
celebrated his wedding to Theodote at the palace of St Mamas for forty days.
  In April of the same 4th indiction, on a Saturday night, there was a terrible 
earthquake in the island of Crete. In Constantinople, too, there was a 
formidable earthquake on 4 May.
  Now Kardamos, the lord of Bulgaria, declared to the emperor, 'Pay me 
tribute or else I will come as far as the Golden Gate and devastate Thrace.' 
The emperor sent him some horse excrement wrapped in a kerchief and said, 
'Such tribute as befits you I have sent you. You are an old man and I do not 
want you to take the trouble of coming all the way here. Instead, I will go to 
Markellai and do you come out. Then let God decide.' The emperor, after 
sending orders to the Asiatic themata, gathered his army and advanced as 
far as Versinikia, while Kardamos went as far as the wooded area of 
Avroleva, but lost courage and remained in the forest. The emperor 
encouraged his men and marched to the treeless part of Avroleva and defied 
Kardamos for seventeen days. The latter, however, did not dare give battle 
and fled back home.
  In the same year the Arabs came as far as Amorion, but did not achieve 
any success and withdrew after taking captives in the surrounding country.
  In the same year Platon, abbot of Sakkoudion, broke communion with the 
patriarch Tarasios because the latter had admitted the emperor to 
communion and had allowed his catechist to tonsure his wife Maria and 
father Joseph, abbot of the Kathara monastery, to
646

marry him to Theodote. On being informed of this, the emperor sent Bardanios, 
patrician and domestic of the Schools, and John comes of Opsikion, and had 
Platon brought to the City and confined in a cell
	4
71 at the church of the Archangel in the palace. The other monks, including 
Platon's nephews, were flogged and exiled to Thessalonica. These were 
supported by the emperor's mother because they opposed him and put him to 
shame.






Constantine, 7th year Aaron, 
2th year
Leo, bishop of Rome (8 years), 1st year 1
Tarasios, 13th year


In this year, in the month of September, the emperor went forth with his 
mother to take the hot baths at Prousa. On 7 October of the 5th indiction a 
son was born to the emperor and was named Leo. On being informed of 
this, the emperor left his mother at the hot baths with all the imperial 
retinue and the commanders and returned in all haste to the City. Profiting 
from this occasion, his mother addressed the commanders of the tagmata 
and beguiled them by means of gifts and promises with a view to deposing 
her son and becoming sole ruler herself; some of them she coaxed 
personally, others through the men of her household, and she drew everyone 
to her side and was waiting to find the proper moment.
  In Rome, following the death of Pope Adrian, Leo, a most honorable 
and highly respectable man, was ordained in his stead.
  In March the emperor went on campaign against the Arabs accompanied 
by the patrician Staurakios and other friends of his mother as well as 
20,000 lightly armed men picked from all the themata. The supporters of 
Staurakios, being aware of the ardor of the army and of the emperor, were 
afraid lest he prove victorious in war and they fail in their plot against 
him. So they bribed the scouts and caused them to lie that the Saracens 
had departed. The emperor, for his part, was much saddened and returned 
to the City empty handed. On 1 May his son Leo died and he wept 
bitterly over him.
  On I7 July, indiction 5, a Thursday, when the emperor, after a racing 
contest, crossed to St Mamas, [the officers] of the tagmata (whom his 
mother had won over) went after him so as to catch him. 472   But he 
learnt of this, embarked on his chelandion, and crossed to Pylai 
intending to seek refuge in the thema of the Anatolics. He was 
accompanied, without his knowledge, by his mother's friends. His wife 
also journeyed as far as Triton. His mother's friends who accompanied 
him took counsel and said among themselves, 'If an army is gathered by 
him, it will no longer be possible to subdue him. We shall not escape his 
notice and he will destroy us.' His mother, for her part, assembled in the 
palace of Eleutherios the officers of the tagmata whom she had won over 
and then entered the imperial palace. When she had learnt that the army 
was collecting round the emperor, she was greatly frightened and 
considered sending a delegation of bishops to him to receive a promise of 
safety and then sit quietly in a corner. She also wrote secretly to her friends 
who were with him, 'Unless you find some way of handing him over, I 
intend to disclose to the emperor your agreements with me.' Frightened, 
they besieged him with their pleas and, after putting him on board the 
chelandion, reached the City on Saturday morning, 15 August,  and 
confined him to the Porphyra,  where he had been born. About
648


the 9th hour they blinded him in a cruel and grievous manner with a view to 
making him die at the behest of his mother and her advisors. The sun was 
darkened for seventeen days and did not emit its rays so that ships lost course 
and drifted about. Everyone acknowledged that the sun withheld its rays 
because the emperor had been blinded. In this manner his mother Irene 
acceded to power.
  In the same year, too, the relatives of the blessed Pope Adrian in Rome 
roused up the people and rebelled against Pope Leo, whom they arrested and 
blinded. They did not manage, however, to extinguish his sight altogether 
because those who were blinding him were merciful and took pity on him. He 
sought refuge with Karoulos, king of the Franks, who took bitter vengeance 
on his enemies and restored him to his throne, Rome falling from that time 
onwards under the authority of the Franks. Repaying his debt 473   to 
Karoulos, Leo crowned him emperor of the Romans in the church of the 
holy apostle Peter after anointing him with oil from head to foot and investing 
him with imperial robes and a crown on 25 December, indiction 9.



(AM 6290, AD 797/8]
Irene, for the second time empress of the Romans (5 years), 1st year 
Aaron, 13th year
Leo, 2nd year Tarasios, 
14th year
In this year Irene, after seizing power, immediately sent Dorotheos, abbot 
of Chrysopolis, and Constantine, chartophylax of the Great Church, to 
Abimelech, who was devastating the regions of Cappadocia and Galatia, 
asking him for peace, but peace was not made.
  In the month of October some troublemakers persuaded the sons of God's 
enemy Constantine, who were confined to the palace of Therapeia, to seek 
refuge in the Great Church on the pretext of ask­ ing a guarantee of their future 
safety so as, by means of this excuse, to proclaim one of them emperor. When 
a great crowd had collected in the church, the patrician Aetios, the eunuch, 
went in and, while no one was paying attention to them, brought them out by 
means of a promise and banished them to Athens. Now the two patricians, 
Staurakios and Aetios, both bosom friends of the empress, fell out
650

with each other to the extent of showing their enmity in public. Both 
aimed at securing the Empire for their own relatives after her death.


Irene, 2nd year 
Aaron, 14th year 
Leo, 3rd year 
Tarasios, 15th year
In this year Abimelech made an expedition against the Roman country. 
Sending out a raiding party of lightly armed men, he advanced as far as 
Malagina.  He fell on the stables of Staurakios and, after taking the 
horses and the imperial herd, returned unharmed. Others went as far 
as Lydia and took many captives. Another Arab party sallied forth and 
fell on Paul, patrician and comes of Opsikion, who was with his whole 
thema and the Optimati, and made a great slaughter of them. After 
taking their camp equipment, that party also withdrew.
In the month of March of the 7th indiction Akameros, chieftain
of the Sklavinians of Velzetia, prompted by the Helladics, planned 474 
to bring Constantine's sons out of confinement and appoint one of 
them emperor. On being informed of this, the empress Irene sent to the 
patrician Constantine Serantapechos his son Theophylaktos, who was 
a spatharios and her own nephew, and he blinded all of them and 
stamped out their plot against her.
  On the Monday of holy Easter the empress processed from the 
church of the Holy Apostles, riding in a golden chariot drawn by four 
white horses and held by four patricians, namely Bardanes, strategos 
of the Thrakesians, Sisinnios, strategos of Thrace, Niketas, domestic 
of the Schools, and Constantine Boilas, and she distributed largess in 
abundance. In the month of May the empress fell ill to the point of 
death and the rivalry between the eunuchs was intensified. Aetios won 
over Niketas, the patrician and domestic of the Schools, and they 
strenuously opposed Staurakios, even suggesting to the empress that he 
was aiming at the throne. In her anger she belabored him severely in 
the palace of Hiereia saying that he was
651

an instigator of unrest and sedition and was preparing his own hasty 
destruction. He, for his part, offered apologies to her and took measures to 
protect himself, furious as he was at the aforesaid patricians Aetios and 
Niketas.


(AM 6292, AD 799/800)
Irene, 3rd year Aaron, 
15th year Leo, 4th year 
Tarasios, 16th year
In this year, in the month of February, indiction 8, the aforesaid Staurakios 
was busy preparing a usurpation and a rebellion in the Imperial City by 
bribing with money and gifts the resident scholarii and excubitors, including 
their officers. For her part, the pious Irene called a silentium in Justinian's 
Hall and forbade all men in government service to approach Staurakios. In 
this way some slight order was introduced into the situation, while the 
aforesaid Aetios
652



and Niketas and a few others strove against Staurakios. The latter, being 
struck in his heart, emitted from his mouth a bloody froth that
came from the organs around his chest and lungs. On seeing this, the 475
physicians pronounced it to be fatal, but the other senseless flatterers, not 
only physicians, but also some false monks and magicians affirmed to him 
under oath until the very day of his death (which occurred in June of the 
same 8th indiction, on a Tuesday) that he would live and become emperor. 
Relying on them, he instigated a revolt against Aetios in the provinces of 
Cappadocia, but did not live to hear the news since word of it came two 
days after his death. The rebels were arrested and suffered exile and 
punishment.



(AM 6293, AD 800/01)
Irene, 4th year Aaron, r 
6th year Leo, 5th year 
Tarasios, 17th year
In this year, on 25 December, indiction 9, Karoulos, king of the Franks, was 
crowned by Pope Leo.  He intended to make a naval expedition against 
Sicily, but changed his mind and decided instead to marry Irene. To this end he 
sent ambassadors the following year, indiction 10.
  In March of the 9th indiction the pious Irene remitted the civic taxes for 
the inhabitants of Byzantium and cancelled the so called komerkia of 
Abydos and Hieron. She was greatly thanked for these and many other 
liberalities.





Irene, 5th year Aaron, 
17th year Leo, 6th year 
Tarasios, 18th year
In this year the patrician Aetios, being rid of Staurakios and feeling secure, 
strove to confer the Empire on his brother  whom he appointed 
monostrategos of Thrace and Macedonia, while he himself was in control of 
the Asiatic themata, namely the Anatolics and Opsikion. Being filled with 
pride, he humiliated dignitaries in positions of authority and took no 
account of them. They, for their part, being much aggrieved at him, planned 
a revolt against the empress and put it into effect. There also arrived the 
emissaries sent by Karoulos and Pope Leo to the most pious Irene asking 
her to marry Karoulos and so unite the eastern and western parts. She would 
have consented had she not been checked by the oft mentioned Aetios 
who ruled by her side and was usurping power on behalf of his brother.




Nikephoros, emperor of the Romans (9 years), 1st year 
Aaron, 18th year
Leo, 7th year Tarasios, 
19th year

In this year, on 31 October of the 11th indiction,  at the 4th hour of the 
night as Monday was about to dawn, Nikephoros, the patrician and 
logothete of the genikon, rebelled against the most pious Irene (God, 
in His inscrutable judgement having permitted this because of the 
multitude of our sins). He was aided by Niketas, patrician and 
domestic of the Schools, and the latter's brother, the patrician 
Sisinnios, the two Triphyllioi, deceitful perjurers that they were. 
These were also joined by the patrician Leo Serantapechos, the 
patrician Gregory (son of Mousoulakios), the patrician Theoktistos 
(the quaestor), and the patrician Peter, who had also suborned some 
officers of the tagmata. Arriving at the so called Chalke (gate), they 
quickly tricked the guards by convincing them that they had been 
sent by the empress to proclaim the same Nikephoros emperor 
because the patrician Aetios was forcing her to proclaim his own 
brother Leo. The guards gave credence to this egregious lie and 
joined in proclaiming the usurper emperor. Thus the patricians 
entered the Great Palace and from there they sent throughout the 
City some insignificant people and slaves to make the proclamation 
before ·midnight. They also placed a guard round the palace of 
Eleutherios, where the empress happened to be. At day break they 
sent for her and confined her in the Great Palace. Thereupon they 
processed to the Great Church to crown the wretch. All the populace of 
the City gathered together and everyone was displeased by what was 
happening and cursed both him who was crowning and him who was 
being crowned and those who approved of these actions. Men who 
lived a pious and reasonable life wondered at God's judgement, namely 
how He had permitted a woman who had suffered like a martyr on 
behalf of the true faith to be ousted by a swineherd and that her closest 
friends should have joined him out 477   of cupidity, I mean Leo of 
Sinope (who was patrician and sakellarios ), and the accursed 
Triphyllioi, and the above mentioned patricians who had been 
enriched by her many liberalities, who had often dined at her table, 
and had assured her through flattery and under terrible oaths that 
they considered her goodwill more essential than anything else in 
the world. Others, as if in ecstasy, felt that what was happening was 
not real and thought they were dreaming. Others again, who were 
capable of making reasonable forecasts, lauded the prosperity that 
had gone by and bewailed the misery that was about to occur on 
account of the usurpation, especially those who had had some 
previous experience of the usurper's evil disposition. A general 
gloom and inconsolable sadness gripped everyone not to prolong my 
account by giving in detail the ugly description of that miserable day. 
Even the weather, contrary to nature, suddenly became on that
6
5
5

day gloomy and lightless, filled with implacable cold in the autumnal 
season, clearly signifying the man's future surliness and unbearable 
oppression, especially towards those who had chosen him.
  The next day, taking along some of the patricians, he went up to the 
imprisoned empress, simulating, as was he wont, a spurious benignity 
through which, indeed, he had deceived nearly everyone. He offered 
his excuses to her, namely that he had been elevated against his will 
to the throne for which he had no desire, and he cursed the men who 
had raised him up while plotting against her (just as Judas had 
betrayed the Lord after dining with Him); indeed, he testified that they 
had imitated Judas in all respects. Showing also his black buskins, he 
affirmed that he liked to wear them contrary to imperial custom. 
Deceitfully he urged her under oath to have no misgivings about her 
every bodily comfort, such as a mistress might expect from her servant, 
and not to consider her fall a misfortune. He also urged her not to 
conceal from him any of the imperial treasures and condemned the 
vice of avarice which he himself was unable to contain: for he was 
terribly afflicted with it, all devourer that he was, and placed all his 
hopes in gold. For her part, the wise and God 
478   loving Irene, though she ought to have been overwhelmed by the 
misfortune of her sudden change (especially since she was a woman), 
said with a brave and prudent mind to him, who but yesterday had 
been a perjured slave and today was an evil, rebellious, and impudent 
usurper:
  'For my part, my good man, I consider God [my helper and avenger] 
who raised me when aforetime I had been left an orphan and elevated 
me, unworthy though I was, to the imperial throne. The cause of my 
downfall I attribute to myself and to my sins and I cry out, "In all things 
and in every manner may the name of the Lord by praised, the only King 
of kings and Lord of lords." The manner of your elevation I also ascribe 
to the Lord, without whom, I am convinced, nothing can happen. You 
are not unaware of the rumors against you, true ones, as the 
consummation of the events has proved that have often been referred to 
me concerning the dignity with which you are now invested. Had I been 
carried away by them, I could have put you to death without hindrance. 
But, partly because I trusted your oaths, partly in order to spare you, I 
disregarded many of my well wishers, in this case, too, referring my 
affairs to God, through whom kings reign and the mighty rule the earth. 
So now, too, inasmuch as you are pious and have been appointed by 
Him, I do obeisance to you as to an emperor and I beseech you to spare 
my weakness and to allow me the mansion of Eleutherios that I have 
built to console me of my incomparable misfortune.'



  He replied: 'If you wish this to happen, swear to me by all the 
heavenly powers not to conceal any part of the imperial treasures, 
and I will fulfill your request and do everything for your comfort and 
repose.' She swore to him upon the holy and life giving cross, saying: 
'I will not conceal anything from you, down to the last penny', which, 
indeed, she did. He, however, having gained what he desired, straight 
away exiled her to the island of Prinkipos, to the monastery which 
she had built, and this while the ambassadors of Karoulos were still 
in the City and observed what was happening.
  So when this universal devourer had seized power, he was unable 
even for a short time to hide by means of dissimulation his innate 
wickedness and avarice; nay, pretending to be about to eradicate 
injustice, he set up that evil and unjust tribunal at the Magnaura.
The usurper's purpose, as was proved by the events, was not to give   479 
the poor their due, but by this means to dishonour and subjugate all 
persons in authority and to gain personal control of everything, which, 
indeed, he did. Being aware that all men were annoyed at
him and fearing that, mindful of the liberalities of the pious Irene, 
they should invite her again to assume power, in the month of 
November, while a severe winter was upon the land, the merciless 
man, instead of pitying her, banished her to the island of Lesbos and 
ordered that she be securely guarded and receive no visitors 
whatever.
  On 30 April Niketas Triphyllios died, reportedly poisoned by 
Nikephoros.
  On 4 May, a Thursday, Nikephoros went to a suburban estate at 
Chalcedon and, after mounting an extremely gentle and tame horse, 
was, by God's providence, thrown off and bruised his right foot.
  On 19 July, a Wednesday, at the first hour, Bardanes surnamed 
Tourkos, the patrician and strategos of the Anatolics, was 
proclaimed emperor by the Asiatic themata. He strenuously declined 
the office, but was unable to frustrate his men. Coming as far as 
Chrysopolis, he toured about for eight days, but was not welcomed 
by the inhabitants of the City and withdrew to Malagina. Filled with 
the fear of God and reflecting that a massacre of Christians should 
not occur on his account, he sent word to Nikephoros and received a 
signed promise written in the latter's hand, wherein the most holy 
patriarch Tarasios and all the patricians had also set down their 
signatures, to the effect that he would remain unharmed and 
unpunished together with all his companions. On 8 September he 
secretly escaped at midnight to Kios in Bithynia and went to the 
monastery of Herakleios. Finding the emperor's chelandion that had 
been dispatched for this purpose, he was tonsured and donned 
monastic garb.
657


Boarding the boat, he proceeded to the island called Prote, where he had built a 
monastery, thinking that the impostor Nikephoros would honour the awesome 
promise he had given him and not harm him in any respect. The latter, however, 
denuded him in the first place of his fortune and, seizing on an excuse, oppressed 
all the officers and landowners of the themata as well as some of the Imperial City, 
whilst he left the army without pay. Who would be able to give an adequate account 
of the deeds committed by him in those days by God's dispensation on account of 
our sins?
  On 9 August of the 11th indiction the empress Ilene died in banishment on the 
island of Lesbos and her body was transferred to the island of Prinkipos to the 
monastery which she had built.

65 8



Nikephoros, 2nd year Aaron, 19th year
Leo, 8th year Tarasios, 20th 
year
In this year, in the month of December of the 12th indiction, Nikephoros crowned 
his son Staurakios emperor in the ambo of the Great Church, the most holy patriarch 
Tarasios officiating, although Staurakios was in all respects unsuitable for this 
office, in appearance, vigor, and temperament. Nikephoros, who had never 
respected truth in any matter, sent certain Lykaonians or rather werewolves who 
shared his opinions and persuasions to Prote. He bade them disembark on the island 
at night and blind the aforementioned Bardanios and, after the deed, as if he was 
unaware of it, to seek refuge in a church. When this had been done, the patriarch, 
the Senate, and all God fearing people were greatly distressed. As for the unrighteous 
emperor Nikephoros, who always acted for show and never according to God, he 
swore to the dignitaries that he had known nothing about it, and seemingly sought 
to slay the Lykaonians, pretending to be taking vengeance on them. For he had, in 
addition to his other iniquities, also this peculiar trait of character, by means of 
which he had deceived many men even before
659

he had become emperor. To those, however, who clearly saw the trick 
he appeared ridiculous in that this man whose foul face was constantly 
clouded by impudence on this occasion remained for seven days 
confined to the imperial chamber, whimpering deceitfully. Indeed, he had 
a natural faculty for a woman's tears, such as many low persons and faux 
bonhommes possess. He did 481   not, however, deceive the majority of 
people.
  In the month of August he made an expedition against the Arabs, whom 
he encountered at Krasos in Phrygia and was defeated in battle. He lost 
many men and was himself on the point of being captured, had not some 
of the bravest officers managed with difficulty to deliver him from 
danger.




Nikephoros, 3rd year 
Aaron, 20th year
Leo, 9th year Tarasios, 
21st year
In this year, because of an insurrection in Persia,  the leader of the Arabs 
went thither to quell it. Taking this opportunity, Nikephoros rebuilt 
Ancyra in Galatia, Thebasa, and Andrasos. He also sent a raiding party 
into Syria which returned without achieving any success, indeed after 
losing many men.
660



(AM 6298, AD 805/6)
Nikephoros, 4th year Aaron, 21st 
year
Leo, 10st year
Nikephoros, bishop of Constantinople (9 years), 1st year
In this year, on 25 February of the 14th Indiction Tarasios, the most holy 
patriarch of Constantinople, died a glorious death. His remains were conveyed 
to the straits of the Black Sea on Wednesday of the first week of Lent and 
buried in the monastery he had built. On 12 April, which was Easter Sunday, 
the most holy Nikephoros, a former a secretis, was ordained patriarch by the 
votes of all the people, the clergy, and the emperors as well. Platon and 
Theodore, abbots of the monastery of Studios, did not approve of the 
ordination of Nikephoros; indeed, having planned a schism, they showed 
strong opposition on the seemingly plausible excuse that a layman ought not 
to be immediately promoted to a bishopric. The emperor Nikephoros wished 
to expel them from the City, but was restrained by certain persons who advised 
him that the patriarch's ordination would not be commended if it were 
accompanied by the expulsion of the aforesaid men and the dissolution of so 
great a monastery, seeing that about 700 monks were placed in Theodore's 
obedience. Besides, what had been done was not alien to the Church nor was it 
a recent invention, since many other laymen had become bishops and 
ministered unto God in a manner worthy of their dignity.
  In the same year Aaron, the leader of the Arabs, invaded the   482 Roman 
country with a great force composed of Maurophoroi, Syrians, Palestinians, and 
Libyans, in all 300,000. Having come to Tyana, he built a house of his blasphemy. He 
captured after a siege
the fort of Herakles, which was very strong, as well as Thebasa, Malakopea, 
Sideropalos, and Andrasos. He sent a raiding contingent of 60,000 which 
penetrated as far as Ancyra and withdrew after
66 1

reconnoitering it. Seized by fright and perplexity, the emperor Nikephoros 
set out also in a state of despair, exhibiting the courage that comes from 
misfortune. After winning many trophies, he sent to Aaron the metropolitan 
of Synada, Peter, abbot of Goulaion, and Gregory, oikonomos of Amastris, to 
ask for peace. After lengthy negotiations they concluded peace on the terms 
that a tribute of 301000 nomismata would be paid to the Arabs each year and a 
capitation tax of 3 nomismata on behalf of the emperor and another 3 on behalf 
of his son. On accepting these terms, Aaron was pleased and overjoyed, more 
than he would have been had he received ten thou­ sand talents, because he 
had subjugated the Roman Empire. They also stipulated that the captured 
forts should not be rebuilt. When the Arabs had withdrawn, however, 
Nikephoros immediately rebuilt and fortified the same forts. On being 
informed of this, Aaron sent out a force and, once again, took Thebasa. He also 
dispatched a fleet to Cyprus, destroyed the churches there, deported the 
Cypriots, and, by causing much devastation, violated the peace treaty.

662

(AM 6299, AD 806/7)
Nikephoros, 5th year 
Aaron, 22nd year
Leo, 11th year 
Nikephoros, 2nd year
In this year Nikephoros made an expedition against the Bulgarians. 
When he had come to Adrianople, he became aware that a revolt 
against him was being planned by imperial officials and by the tagmata 
and so he returned empty handed, having achieved nothing except 
vengeance on his fellow countrymen, many of whom he punished by 
scourging, exile, and confiscation. He also sent the spatharios Bardanios 
surnamed Anemas to round up all the refugees and aliens  and convey 
them to Thrace, thinking that he would obtain
from them a considerable amount of gold by way of annual taxes   483 this 
man who did everything for the gold he loved and not for Christ.



[AM 6300, AD 807/8)
Nikephoros, 6th year 
Aaron, 23rd year
Leo, 12th year
Nikephoros, 3rd year
In this year, in the month of September of the first indiction, Aaron, 
the leader of the Arabs, sent Choumeid at the head of a fleet against 
Rhodes. This man sailed straight to Rhodes and, on arriving there, 
carried out much devastation, but the fort that is there remained 
uncaptured. On his return journey he was manifestly worsted by the 
holy wonder worker Nicholas. For when he had come to Myra and 
attempted to break his sacred tomb, he smashed instead another one 
that stood near by. Thereupon a great disturbance of sea waves, 
thunder, and lightning fell upon the fleet so that several ships were 
broken up and the impious Choumeid himself acknowledged the 
saint's power and unexpectedly escaped the danger.
On 20 December, after making an extensive selection of maidens


from all the domains subject to him with a view to marrying his son 
Staurakios, Nikephoros chose the Athenian Theophano, a kinswoman of 
the blessed Irene, although she was betrothed to another man and had lain 
with him many times. Acting in this respect with the same unlawful 
impudence as in all others, he separated her from her man and wed her 
to the wretched Staurakios. He also selected along with her another two 
maidens who were more beautiful than her and openly violated them 
during the very days of the wedding, while everyone ridiculed the 
detestable man.
  In the month of February many officials planned a revolt against him 
and conferred their choice on the quaestor and patrician Arsaber, a pious 
and cultivated man. But when the resourceful Nikephoros had been 
informed of this, he had him scourged and tonsured and having made him 
a monk, exiled him to Bithynia, whilst the others he punished with 
lashes, banishment, and confiscation, not only secular dignitaries, but also 
holy bishops and monks and the clergy of the Great Church, including 
the synkellos, the sakellarios, and the chartophylax, men of high repute 
and worthy of respect.

(AM 6301, AD 808/9)
Nikephoros, 7th year
Mouamed, leader of the Arabs (4 years), 1st year 
664


Leo, 13th year Nikephoros, 4th 
year
In this year Aaron, the leader of the Arabs, died in inner Persia, called 
Chorasan, in the month of March, indiction 2. His son Mouamed, who was 
incompetent in all respects, succeeded to power, but his brother Abdelas as 
well as his father's army revolted against him in that same country of 
Chorasan and caused an internecine war among their nation. For this reason 
the inhabitants of Syria, Egypt, and Libya were divided into different 
principalities and destroyed the common weal as well as one another, 
confounded as they were by slaughter, rapine, and various misdeeds among 
themselves and against their Christian subjects. For this reason also the 
churches in the holy city of Christ our God were made desolate as well as the 
monasteries of the two great lavras, namely that of Saints Chariton and 
Kyriakos and that of St Sabas, and the other koinobia, namely those of St 
Euthymios and St Theodosios. The slaughter resulting from this anarchy, 
directed at each other and against us, lasted five years.
  Theodore, abbot of Studios, and his brother Joseph, the archbishop of 
Thessalonica, along with the recluse Platon and their other monks withdrew 
from communion with Nikephoros, the most holy patriarch, on account of 
the oikonomos Joseph who had unlawfully married Constantine and 
Theodote. Seizing this opportunity, the emperor Nikephoros assembled 
many bishops and abbots and ordered that a synod be held against them. By 
this means they were expelled from their monastery and from the City and 
were banished in the month of January of the second indiction.
  In the same year, while the army of the Strymon was receiving its pay, the 
Bulgarians fell upon it and seized 1,000 lbs. of gold.   485 They slaughtered 
many men together with their strategos and officers. Many garrison 
commanders of the other themata were present and all of them perished 
there. The Bulgarians took the whole camp train and withdrew. Before 
Easter of the same year, Kroummos, the leader of the Bulgarians, drew up his 
forces against Serdica, which he took by a deceitful capitulation and 
slaughtered 6,ooo Roman soldiers, not counting the multitude of civilians. 
Nikephoros pretended to be going on campaign against him on Tuesday of 
the Saviors Passion week, but did not achieve anything worthy of mention. 
When the officers who had escaped the massacre requested from him a 
promise of immunity, he refused to give it and so forced them to desert to the 
enemy, among them the spatharios Eumathios, an expert in engines. To add 
to his great
665

dishonour, Nikephoros tried to convince the Imperial City by means of 
sworn sacrae that he had celebrated the feast of Easter in the court of 
Kroummos. Wishing to rebuild captured Serdica, but fearing the 
opposition of the host, he suggested to the strategoi and officers that they 
should persuade the rank and file to petition the emperor for the 
rebuilding. The soldiers, however, understood that the intrigue had been 
mounted by the emperor's ill doing and rebelled against him and their 
own officers at the 6th hour. They set upon their officers' tents and tore 
them down and, advancing to the imperial [tent], cast many insults and 
curses upon him, swearing that they could no longer suffer his infinite 
avarice and mischievous character. Terrified by the sudden mutiny, he 
stood up from table and at first, through the patricians Nikephoros and 
Peter, tried to calm the army by means of oaths and plausible arguments. 
Desisting somewhat, the wretches abandoned their course of action and 
withdrew to a hill crying, 'Lord, have mercy!' as if it were an earthquake 
or a drought. Always ready for evil deeds, the emperor deceived most of the 
officers during the night by means of secret gifts and the next morning he 
appeared himself among the soldiers and spoke to them, assuring them 
under terrible oaths that they would enjoy all kinds
486		of plenty and that he would be equally solicitous towards their children. 
Straight away he made for the Imperial City, having directed the patrician 
and promoskrinios Theodosios, surnamed Salibaras, to identify the rebels 
by mutual admission. While the army was on its way back, he pretended 
to be about to pay them, but instead punished most of them at St Mamas 
by lashes, tonsure, and exile, and the rest he conveyed to Chrysopolis 
having transgressed his terrible oaths. On account of their misfortune 
they called the Bosporus the 'river of fire'.

666




Nikephoros, 8th year 
Mouamed, 2nd year Leo, 
14th year Nikephoros, 5th 
year
In this year Nikephoros, following the godless punishments [he had meted 
out) and intent on humiliating the army altogether, removed Christians from 
all the themata  and ordered them to proceed to the Sklavinias after selling 
their estates. This state of affairs was no less grievous than captivity: many 
in their folly uttered blasphemies and prayed to be invaded by the enemy, 
others wept by their ancestral tombs and extolled the happiness of the dead; 
some even hanged themselves to be delivered from such a sorry pass. Since 
their possessions were difficult to transport, they were in no position to take 
them along and so witnessed the loss of properties acquired by parental 
toil. Everyone was in complete distress, the poor because of the above 
circumstances and those that will be recounted later on, while the richer 
sympathized with the poor whom they were unable to help and awaited 
heavier misfortunes. These measures were started in the month of 
September and completed by holy Easter. In addition, he ordered a second 
vexation, namely that poor people should be enrolled in the army and should 
be fitted out by the inhabitants of their commune, also paying to the 
Treasury 18 and one half, nomismata per man plus his taxes in joint 
liability. His third evil invention was that everyone was to be assessed and 
everyone's taxes were to be raised, with an additional payment of 2 keratia 
per
667

man for the paperwork. The fourth measure he ordered was that all 
remissions should be cancelled. The fifth was that the paroikoi of 
charitable foundations, of the Orphanage, of hostels, homes for the aged, 
churches, and imperial monasteries should be charged the hearth tax 
counting from the first year of his usurpation, and that their more 
important estates should be transferred to the imperial demesne, whilst 
the rates due on them should be added to such estates and paroikoi as 
were left to the charitable foundations, with the result that many of them 
had their tax doubled whereas their dwellings and rural holdings were 
reduced. The sixth measure was that the strategoi should keep an eye on 
all who recovered quickly from poverty and exact money from them as if 
they had found treasure trove. The seventh was that everyone who in the 
previous twenty years had discovered any kind of jar or vessel should 
likewise be deprived of their money. The eighth was that poor people 
who had received a divided inheritance from their fathers and 
grandfathers should be taxed by the Treasury for the same period of 
twenty years; and that those who had bought household slaves outside 
Abydos and especially in the Dodecanese should pay an impost of 2 
nomismata per head. The ninth was that the ship owners who lived on the 
sea coast, especially that of Asia Minor, and who had never practised 
agriculture should be forced to buy some of the estates he had seized 
with a view to being assigned an assessment by him. His tenth measure 
was to convene the foremost ship owners of Constantinople and give 
each a loan of 12 lbs. of gold at a rate of interest of 4 keratia to the 
nomisma on top of the usual custom dues to which they were liable.
  I have made a succinct and brief record of these actions, and they are but a 
small part, in order to indicate this man's inventiveness in all manner of 
greed. It would be impossible to describe the misfortunes he inflicted in the 
Imperial City on dignitaries, on the middling folk, and the poor: in the case 
of some he inquired how they lived at home and suborned malicious 
servants to denounce their masters; and at first he would pretend to doubt their 
statements, but later would accept the false accusations. In the same manner he 
used lowly persons against persons of note and would confer honours on those 
who made clever denunciations. Many occupiers of houses he completely 
ruined from the first to the third generation in the hope that they would 
quickly lose their title, which he would inherit. The following incident is 
worthy of note as an amusing example. There was at the Forum a candle 
merchant who lived in plenty thanks to his own exertions. The universal 
devourer summoned him and said, 'Place your hand upon my head and swear to 
me how much
668


gold you have.' The latter at first declined, pretending to be unworthy [of 
such attention], but was forced by him to do so and admitted that he 
possessed 100 lbs. The emperor ordered on the spot that the sum be 
produced and said, 'What need have you of so much worry? Be my guest 
for lunch, take 10 lbs. and go home satisfied with what you have.'


[AM 6303, AD 810/11]
Nikephoros, 9th 
year Mouamed, 3rd 
year Leo, 15th year 
Nikephoros, 6th year
In this year Nikephoros extended his designs against the Christians  
by way of an ungodly control over the purchase of all kinds of 
animals, cattle and produce, the unjust confiscations and fines 
imposed upon prominent persons, and the exaction of interest on 
ships (he who issued laws against usury!) and a thousand other evil 
inventions. To describe all of them in detail would appear tedious to 
those who seek to learn events in a succinct form.
  On 1 October, a Tuesday, a man of lowly station dressed as a 
monk seized a sword belonging to someone in military service and 
ran into the palace seeking to kill Nikephoros. Two of those who 
were standing round rushed on him, but were grievously wounded 
by him. When he had been arrested and tortured severely, he 
pretended to be a demoniac and did not denounce anybody. The 
emperor had him confined in stocks together with other madmen. 
Many regarded this as a presage of great evil to come both to rulers 
and to subjects, as had happened in the case of the impious 
Nestorios.
  The emperor was an ardent friend of the Manichees (now called 
Paulicians) and of his close neighbors, the Athinganoi of Phrygia and 
Lykaonia, and delighted in their prophecies and rites. Indeed, he called 
them in when the patrician Bardanios rebelled against him and 
subjugated him by means of their magic. For he tied an ox by the horns 
to an iron stake in some sort of hollow and as the animal was bent to 
the ground, bellowing and writhing, he had it slaughtered and then 
ground the clothing of Bardanios in a mill with a contrary motion and 
performed certain incantations. As a result, he won a victory which 
God allowed because of the multitude of our sins. Those heretics 
were given leave during his reign to enjoy the rights of citizenship 
without fear so that many of the more frivolous kind became 
corrupted by their illicit doctrines. At the Hexakionion, too, there 
was a false hermit called Nicholas who, together with his
companions, blasphemed against the true religion and the holy icons 489 
and was defended by Nikephoros to the distress of the patriarch and
of all those who lived according to God. Indeed, he was vexed when 
the patriarch on many occasions brought charges against those men, 
for he greatly encouraged mutual hostility and railed at every 
Christian who loved his neighbor, being as he was a subverter of
6
7
1

the divine ordinances. He was also eager for good or bad cause to 
institute proceedings against all Christians at the penal tribunal of the 
Magnaura so that nobody should be free to censure his impious deeds. 
He commanded military officers to treat bishops and clergymen like 
slaves, to lodge high handedly in episcopal residences and monasteries 
and abuse their goods. He censured those who from olden times had 
dedicated to God gold or silver vessels and argued that the sacred 
objects of churches should be made common, as Judas had done in the 
case of the Lord's ointment. He blamed all the emperors before him for 
having been incompetent and entirely denied Providence by saying that 
no one was more powerful than the ruler provided the latter was 
determined to exercise his authority skillfully. But he was confounded in 
his imaginations, he whom God was to slay.
  In February of the same 4th indiction, on the first Saturday of Lent 
the Saracens surprised at Euchaita the strategos of the Armeniacs, Leo, 
with the pay of his thema which they captured along with a great 
number of soldiers. The amount was 13 talents, that is 1,300 lbs. Not even 
then did Nikephoros accept reproof by desisting from his greed. 
Uncorrected by so many presages, the new Ahab, who was more insatiable 
than Phalaris or Midas, took up arms against the Bulgarians along with his 
son Staurakios. On ? May, as he was departing from the Imperial City, he 
ordered the patrician Niketas, the logothete of the genikon, to raise the 
taxes of churches and monasteries and to exact eight years' arrears from 
the households of dignitaries. At this there was much lamentation. One 
of his faithful servants, I mean the patrician Theodosios Salibaras, 
complained to him, saying, 'Everyone is clamoring against us, 0 lord, 
and, in a time of temptation, will take pleasure in our downfall.' But he 
replied, 'If God has hardened my heart as He 490   hardened 
Pharaoh's, what good can come to my subjects? Do not, 0 Theodosios, 
expect from Nikephoros anything other than what you see.' The Lord is 
my witness that I, the author, heard these very words from the mouth of 
Theodosios. So, having gathered his troops, not only from Thrace, but 
also from the Asiatic themata as well as many poor men armed at their 
own expense with slings and sticks (who were cursing him as did the 
soldiers), he advanced against the Bulgarians. Frightened by this 
multitude which had come to Markellai, Kroummos asked for peace. The 
emperor, however, by his own evil designs and the recommendation of 
his likeminded advisers, refused. After making many detours through 
impassable country the rash coward recklessly entered Bulgaria on 20 
July (the disastrous rising of the dog star), frequently repeating
672

these words, 'Who will go and deceive Ahab? He is drawn against 
his will, be it by God or the Adversary.' Before he had entered 
Bulgaria, his favorite servant Byzantios fled to Kroummos from 
Markellai having seized the imperial robes and 100 lbs. of gold. His 
flight was regarded by many people as an ill omen for Nikephoros. 
For three days after the first encounters the emperor appeared to be 
successful, but did not ascribe his victory to God who grants success; 
instead, he proclaimed the good fortune and judgement of Staurakios 
alone and made threats against the officers who had opposed the 
invasion. He ordered that senseless animals, 15 infants, and persons of 
all ages should be slain without mercy and left the corpses of his 
fellow countrymen unburied, mindful only of the collection of spoils. 
He also placed locks and seals on the treasury of Kroummos and 
secured it as if it was his own: any Christians who laid hands on the 
spoils had their ears or other parts of the body amputated. He set fire 
to the so called 'court' of Kroummos, while the latter was greatly 
humbled and declared, 'Behold, you have won. Take, therefore, 
anything you desire and depart in peace.' But the enemy of peace 
would not approve of peace; whereupon, the other became vexed and 
gave instructions to secure the entrances and exits of his country with 
wooden barriers. On becoming aware of this, Nikephoros was 
immediately dumbfounded and went about not knowing what to do. 
To his companions he foretold disaster, saying, 'Even if we grow 
wings, let no one imagine he will escape his
doom.' These moves occupied two days, Thursday and Friday. In the   491 
night of Saturday the tumult of armed contingents could be heard all
round Nikephoros and his companions and unnerved everyone. 
Before daybreak the barbarians fell on the tent of Nikephoros and 
those of his commanders and slew him miserably. Among the victims 
were the patrician Aetios, the patrician Peter, the patrician Sisinnios 
Triphylles, the patrician Theodosios Salibaras (who had caused much 
sorrow and distress to the blessed Irene), the patrician prefect, the 
patrician Romanus, who was strategos of the Anatolics, and many 
protospatharioi and spatharioi, the commanders of the tagmata, 
including the domestic of the excubitors and the drungarios of the 
Imperial Watch, the strategos of Thrace, many officers of the themata, 
and an infinite number of soldiers so that the flower of Christendom was 
destroyed. All the arms were lost as were the imperial utensils. May not 
Christians experience another time the ugly events of that day for 
which no lamentation is adequate. These things happened on 26 July 
of the 4th indiction.
  Kroummos cut off the head of Nikephoros and for several days hung 
it on a pole so as to exhibit it to the tribes that came before him
6
73


and to dishonour us. After that, he bared the skull, reveted it on the 
outside with silver and, in his pride, made the chieftains of the 
Sklavinians drink from it. When so many widows and orphans were left 
on that day, in the midst of such uncontrollable weeping, the slaying of 
Nikephoros appeared to many persons as a consolation. None of the 
survivors could describe exactly the manner of his murder: some even 
affirm that Christians stoned him when he had fallen. As for his 
effeminate servants (with whom he went to bed), some perished in the 
fire of the ditch, others, along with him, by the sword. At no time did 
Christians have the misfortune of experiencing a rule more grievous than 
his. He surpassed all his predecessors by his greed, his licentiousness, his 
barbaric cruelty: to 492   describe everything in detail would be for us a 
laborious task and make a story that future generations will not believe. 
As the proverb says, the cloth can be judged by its hem.
  The emperor's son, Staurakios, received a fatal blow to the right of 
his spine and, barely escaping alive from the battle, reached 
Adrianople, sorely tormented by his wound. The patrician Stephen, 
who was domestic of the Schools, in the presence of the magistros 
Theoktistos, proclaimed Staurakios emperor and the latter spoke to the 
remnants of the army blaming his own father, at which they were 
greatly pleased. The curopalates Michael, who escaped unharmed, 
received many entreaties from his friends that he should be proclaimed 
emperor, but did not consent because of his oath to Nikephoros and 
Staurakios. As for the magistros Theoktistos, he was in favour of 
Michael's becoming emperor. Now Staurakios suffered a heavy 
hemorrhage through his urine; his thighs and limbs were paralyzed and 
he was brought to Byzantium in a litter. The patriarch Nikephoros, who 
was very friendly with him, advised him to propitiate God and to 
indemnify those who had been wronged by his father; but the true heir 
of his father's character replied that he was unable to return more than 
3 talents, which was but a small part of that man's extortions. Even 
with respect to that sum he showed himself dilatory, hoping as he did to 
survive. Being endowed with his father's implacable character, he kept 
heaping insults on the magistros Theoktistos, the domestic Stephen, and 
the curopalates Michael and was completely alienated from his own sister 
Prokopia for plotting against him at the instigation of the Augusta 
Theophano; for the unhappy woman, who was childless, was hoping to 
obtain the Empire straight away in the manner of the blessed Irene. 
Seeing himself to be in an incurable condition, Staurakios sought to 
secure the empire for his wife in preference to causing confusion 
among Christians on top of their previous misfortunes.
674

Alarmed by this, the patriarch Nikephoros, the magistros 
Theoktistos, the domestic Stephen, and the curopalates Michael 
towards the end of September of the 5th indiction exchanged their 
mutual hostility for friendship. On the evening of 1 October 
Staurakios called in the domestic Stephen and asked him how he 
493   could remove his brother in law Michael from his house so as 
to blind him. When Stephen had replied it was impossible at that hour 
because of the force Michael had with him and the secure position of 
his house, Staurakios begged him that their conversation should not be 
revealed to anyone. Having convinced him by means of persuasive 
words to allay his fears, Stephen assembled all through the night the 
remaining contingents of the tagmata together with their officers in 
the covered Hippodrome in order to proclaim Michael emperor. When 
at dawn the whole Senate had come into the palace, they did proclaim 
him emperor as will be stated later. The patriarch Nikephoros 
demanded from Michael a statement written in his own hand 
concerning the true faith, promising to keep his hands unsullied by 
Christian blood and not to smite clergymen, monks, or any other 
member of the ecclesiastical establishment.
6
7
5





AM 6304 (AD 8II/I2]
Year of the divine Incarnation 804
Michael, emperor of the Romans ( 2 years), 1st year 
Mouamed, leader of the Arabs ( 4 years), 4th year Leo, 
bishop of Rome (16 years), 16th year
Nikephoros, bishop of Constantinople (9 years), 7th year
In this year, on 2 October of the 5th indiction,  a Thursday, at the first 
hour, the most pious curopalates Michael was proclaimed emperor of 
the Romans in the Hippodrome by the entire Senate and the tagmata. 
Having heard of his proclamation, Staurakios immediately cut off his 
hair and put on monastic garb through the offices of his relative, the 
monk Symeon, all the time calling for the patriarch. The latter came to 
the palace together with the emperor Michael and Staurakios' sister 
and fervently begged Staurakios not to be grieved by the tum of 
events, which was due not to a plot, but to despair concerning his life. 
Still raging with his father's wickedness, Staurakios did not acquiesce 
and said to him, 'You will not find him a better friend than me.' At 
the 4th hour of that day Michael was crowned by the patriarch 
Nikephoros in the ambo of the Great Church, whereupon there was 
general rejoicing. He donated 50 lbs. of gold to the patriarch and 25 to 
the clergy. Being magnanimous and liberal, he indemnified all those 
who had been injured by the greed of Nikephoros and restored the 
Senate and the army by means of gifts.	 			
		 494 
On the 12th of the same month Prokopia was crowned Augusta in the 
hall of the Augusteus and honoured the Senate with many gifts. The 
emperor donated 5 talents of gold to the widows of the thematic 
soldiers killed in Bulgaria. He also enriched Theophano, the wife of 
Staurakios, who had become a nun as well as her relatives who had 
lived wretchedly under Nikephoros. Amongst others, he ceded to her 
an imposing mansion, called ta Hebraika,  to be made into a 
monastery: that is where Staurakios was buried. He also enriched all 
the patricians and senators, bishops, priests and monks, service men

and the poor, both in the Imperial City and in the themata, so that in a 
few days the infinite avarice of Nikephoros (on account of which he met 
an evil end) was wiped out. Being, in addition to his many other 
excellent qualities, pious and highly orthodox, he was distressed by 
those who severed themselves from the holy Church for any cause 
whatever, reasonable or unreasonable, and did not cease begging on 
their behalf the most holy patriarch and those able to contribute to the 
general peace. Wherefore he strove that Theodore, abbot of Studios, 
Platon, and Joseph, archbishop of Thessalonica (Theodore's brother), 
who had been subjected to bitter confinement, and the other prominent 
members of their monastery should be united to the Church, and this he 
achieved. He also sent an embassy to Karoulos, king of the Franks, to treat 
of peace and a marriage contract for his son Theophylaktos.  Likewise 
the most holy patriarch Nikephoros sent a synodic letter to Leo, the 
most holy Pope of Rome; for previously he had been prevented from 
so doing by Nikephoros. 
  On 25 December of the 5th indiction, a Thursday, Michael, the most 
serene emperor, crowned his son Theophylaktos emperor by the hand 
of the patriarch Nikephoros in the ambo of the Great Church. He 
offered a sumptuous adornment for the holy sanctuary, namely golden 
vessels set with stones and a set of four curtains of ancient manufacture, 
splendidly embroidered in gold and purple and decorated with wonderful 
sacred images. He also donated 25 lbs. of gold to the patriarch and 100 
lbs. to the venerable clergy, so 495 adorning the holy feast and his son's 
proclamation. Moved by an excess of divine zeal, the most pious 
emperor, at the instigation of the most holy patriarch Nikephoros and 
other pious persons, decreed the death penalty against the Manichees 
(that is the Paulicians of today) and the Athinganoi who live in Phrygia 
and Lykaonia, but was turned back from this course by certain perverse 
counselors who used the pretext of repentance, although those who have 
fallen into that error are incapable of repenting. The counselors argued in 
their ignorance that priests ought not to condemn the impious to death, 
being in this respect in complete contradiction to Holy Scripture. For if 
Peter, the chief apostle, put Ananias and Sapphira to death for nothing 
more than a lie; if the great Paul cries out saying, 'They which commit 
such things are worthy of death; and this with reference to bodily sin 
only; does it not follow that those who deliver from the sword persons 
that are filled with every manner of spiritual and bodily impurity and are 
worshippers of demons stand in contradiction to the apostles? Even so, 
the pious emperor Michael executed not a few of those heretics.

  Staurakios developed ulcers on his back on account of his fatal 
wound so that no one could bear to approach him because of the foul 
stench. He died on 11 January of the 5th indiction after a nominal 
reign of 2 months and 6 days.
  On 14 May, a Friday, there was a great eclipse of the sun lasting three 
and a half hours, from the 8th to the 11th hour.
  On 7 June Michael set out against the Bulgarians and was 
accompanied by Prokopia as far as Tzouroulon. The Bulgarian leader 
Kroummos had taken Debeltos by siege and transplanted its population, 
which had defected to him together with their bishop. Following this, 
because of the great perversity of the emperor's evil counselors, the 
army and, in particular, the contingents of Opsikion and the 
Thrakesians, raised a sedition and uttered insults. Michael calmed 
them with gifts and admonitions and so reduced them to
silence. Having been informed that the troops had rebelled for fear of 496 
war and had been disorderly on garrison duty, the Bulgarians extended their 
power over Thrace and Macedonia. At that time the Christians abandoned 
Anchialos and Beroia and fled, although no one was pursuing them; the 
same at Nikaia, the castle of Probaton, and a number of other forts as also 
at Philippoupolis and Philippi. Seizing this opportunity, the immigrants who 
lived at the Strymon also fled and returned to their homes. That was a sign 
of divine wrath reproving the madness of Nikephoros: as a result, his 
ostensible achievements, on which he prided himself, quickly collapsed. 
Now those who had neglected to censure the evil doctrines prevalent 
among many men, namely the widespread heresies of God's enemies, the 
Paulicians, Athinganoi, iconoclasts, and Tetraditai (I refrain from 
mentioning adultery and fornication, licentiousness and perjury, brotherly 
hatred, avarice, and other transgressions) began moving their tongues 
against the holy icons and the monastic habit and to laud the abominable 
and thrice, miserable Constantine because (as those wretches impiously 
affirmed) he had won victories over the Bulgarians thanks to his piety. Such 
of them as were in the Imperial City took up arms to subvert the orthodox 
faith even after an ecumenical council. Blinded in their spirit, they desired 
that blind men should reign without God's assent, namely the sons of God's 
enemy Constantine, then kept under guard on the island of Panormos, 
whom they intended to abduct in the night and bring before the army. But 
the Lord put them to shame and roused the most pious Michael to avenge 
the truth. Without dissimulation he addressed to the army some reasonable 
words about the faith and then returned to the Imperial City and, by a 
clever stratagem, frightened the majority of the conspirators by means of a 
few blows and
6
7
9



exiled Constantine's blind sons to Aphousia. He cut off the tongue of one of 
those vagabond pseudo hermits, the fellow magician of Nicholas of 
Hexakionion, who had scraped and dishonoured an icon of the all holy 
Theotokos, and who now died a spiritual as well as a bodily death. As for 
the latter's fellow thinker Nicholas who had
497   announced his repentance, he had him confess his misdeeds in public and 
placed him in a monastery with instructions that he should not lead an 
independent regimen. At a silentium held in the Magnaura he addressed the 
people and set out the pious doctrines of his godly mind. The Athinganoi he 
subjected to confiscation and banishment at the hands of Leo, strategos of 
the Anatolics.
  In the month of August of the 5th indiction Thebith made an expedition 
against the Christians. Leo, strategos of the Anatolics, met him in battle and 
gained a victory after killing 2,000 and capturing horses and weapons. 
Mouamed, Aaron's eldest son, who was the ruler of the Arab nation, gave 
battle to his brother Abdelas in inner Persia and was defeated. He fled to 
Baghdad which he held. Damascus was occupied by a usurper, Egypt and 
Africa were divided between two rulers, and another devastated Palestine like a 
robber.
680





Year of the divine Incarnation 805 Michael, 
2nd year
Leo, 17th year Nikephoros 8th 
year 
In this year Kroummos, the leader of the Bulgarians, sent Dargameros  on a 
new mission of peace to the emperor Michael, seeking the terms that had 
been agreed at the time of Theodosios of Adramytion and the patriarch 
Germanus with Kormesios, the then lord of Bulgaria. The terms in question 
established the boundary at Meleones in Thrace; [a tribute] of vestments and 
[dyed] red hides to the value of 30 lbs. of gold; furthermore, that refugees 
from either side should be returned to their respective homes even if they 
had plotted against their own rulers, and that those who traded in both 
countries should be certified by means of diplomas and seals: (anyone not 
having seals would lose) his assets which would be confiscated by the 
Treasury. He also wrote accusations against the emperor, namely, 'If you do 
not hasten to make peace, I will, through
681



your fault, array myself against Mesembria.' When the emperor had received 
this message, he did not accept peace at the instigation of his evil 
counselors, who affirmed under a false pretext of piety, but rather out of 
ignorance and to the destruction of the common good, that refugees should 
not be surrendered in confirmation of which they quoted the Lord's saying in 
the Gospel, 'Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.'
  In the middle of October Kroummos arrayed himself against Mesembria 
with an equipment of machines and siege engines in which he had become 
expert through the fault of Nikephoros, the destroyer of the Christians. For 
there was an Arab, highly skilled in engineering, who had accepted baptism 
and whom Nikephoros enrolled in imperial service and established at 
Adrianople, but offered him no suitable assistance or reward; on the 
contrary, he diminished his pay and, when the latter complained, had him 
severely beaten. Thereupon, the Arab in his despair defected to the 
Bulgarians and taught them the whole art of making engines. So Kroummos 
took up his position; and since, out of stupidity, no one offered him any 
resistance all through that month, he occupied Mesembria.
  On 1 November the emperor, reduced to such straits, invited the 
patriarch to confer about peace; also present were the metropolitans of 
Nicaea and Kyzikos and the evil counselors, (including Theodore, abbot of 
Studios). The patriarch, the metropolitans, and the emperor favored peace, 
whereas the evil counselors along with Theodore, abbot of Studios, rejected 
peace, saying, 'One ought not to embrace peace if that means subverting a 
divine commandment: for the Lord has declared, "Him that cometh to me I 
will in no wise cast out" 'not knowing what they were saying nor that 
concerning which they were making affirmations. In the first place, 
whereas no one from the other side was seeking refuge with us, we would 
be betraying those within 'the court' whom we could have saved by making 
peace. In the second place, even if a few did escape to us, it was more 
necessary to purchase the safety of the greater number (who were our 
fellow countrymen) than to be in possession of some unknown and 
insignificant [individuals]: for God is pleased when the greater rather than 
the lesser number are saved and it is surely a sign of complete madness to 
sustain a great loss for a small gain. Furthermore, he who does not provide 
for those of his own house has denied his faith, according to Paul, and is 
considered worse than an infidel. Arid what about, 'I was peaceable with 
them that hated peace'? Are they perchance wiser than both Paul and 
David? Arid who is today wiser than the thrice, blessed Germanus, except 
the
682
evil counselors in their soul destroying vanity who stood in the way of 
peace?
  These things, as already indicated, occurred on November. On the 4th of 
the same month was seen a comet in the shape of two luminous crescents, 
now united, now separated so as to assume different forms and take on the 
likeness of a headless man. And on the following day we received the 
disastrous news of the capture of Mesembria, which frightened everyone by 
the prospect of greater ills. For they found it filled with all manner of goods 
that are necessary for human habitation and took possession of it along with 
Debeltos, wherein they found 36 brass siphons and a considerable quantity 
of the liquid fire that is projected from them  as well as an abundance of gold 
and silver.
  In the same year many of the Christians of Palestine, monks and laymen, 
and from all of Syria arrived in Cyprus, fleeing the excessive misdeeds of the 
Arabs. For, as a result of the general anarchy that prevailed in Syria, Egypt, 
Africa, and their entire dominion, murders, rapes, adulteries, and all manner 
of licentious acts that are abhorred by God were committed in villages and 
towns by that accursed nation. In the holy city of Christ our God the 
venerable places of the holy Resurrection, of Golgotha, and the rest were 
profaned. Likewise the famous lavras in the desert, that of St Chariton and 
that of St Sabas, and the other monasteries and churches were made 
desolate. Some Christians were killed like martyrs, while others proceeded 
to Cyprus and thence to Byzantium and were given kindly hospitality by the 
pious emperor Michael and the most holy patriarch Nikephoros. The 
emperor made a gift of an important monastery to those who had come to the 
City, while to those who had remained in Cyprus, both monks and laymen, 
he sent a talent of gold and provided for them in every way. The emperor 
Michael was kindly and gentle towards everyone, but in the administration 
of affairs he was incompetent and subservient to the 500   magistros 
Theoktistos and to other dignitaries.
  In the month of February two Christian refugees from Bulgaria 
announced to the emperor that Kroummos was making haste to ambush 
those who were in Thrace. On the 15th of the month the emperor marched 
out of the City and, by God's providence, Kroummos withdrew empty 
handed after losing many of his men. The emperor proceeded to Adrianople 
and, having taken appropriate measures there, returned joyfully. He then 
went up to the monastery of St Tarasios, the patriarch, and, after celebrating 
a memorial service together with the Augusta Prokopia, reveted his holy 
tomb with silver sheeting weighing 95 lbs.
683


  After the fall of Mesembria the emperor renounced the prospect of peace 
with Kroummos. He made a levy from all the themata and ordered that 
they should cross to Thrace before spring. As a result, everyone was 
annoyed, especially the Cappadocians and the Armeniacs. In May the 
emperor set out with the tagmata and, once again, the Augusta Prokopia 
accompanied him as far as ta Akedouktou near Herakleia. This provoked 
the army to curse and mock Michael. On 4 May there was an eclipse of the 
sun in the 14th degree of the Bull according to the astronomical tables, at 
sunrise, and great fear fell on the people. The emperor with the generals and 
the army made a tour of Thrace, neither proceeding against Mesembria nor 
undertaking any other necessary action with a view to the discomfiture of 
the enemy. Instead, he gave credence to the vain words of his unwarlike 
counselors who affirmed that the enemy would not dare attack him while 
he remained on home ground. The presence of such a throng of our fellow 
countrymen who lacked necessary supplies and ruined the local inhabitants 
by rapine and invasion was more grievous than a barbarian attack. At the 
beginning of June. Kroummos, the leader of the Bulgarians, fearful of the 
great numbers of the Christian army, set out at the head of his own troops. 
When he had encamped at Versinikia, about thirty miles from the imperial 
army, the patrician Leo, strategos of the Anatolics, and the patrician John 
Aplakes, strategos of Macedonia, were very eager to give battle, but were 
prevented from so doing by the emperor on account of his evil counselors.
  In the City, while the people and the patriarch were performing a litany in 
the church of the Holy Apostles, some impious members of the foul heresy 
of the God hated Constantine prised up the door of the imperial mausoleum 
(no one was paying any attention because the throng was so thick) and 
made it open suddenly with some kind of noise as if by a divine miracle. 
They then rushed in and fell before the deceiver's tomb, calling on him and 
not on God, crying out, 'Arise and help the State that is perishing!' They 
spread the rumour that Constantine had arisen on his horse and was setting 
out to fight the Bulgarians, he who dwells in Hell in the company of 
demons! The City prefect arrested those men and at first they lied, 
pretending that the doors of the mausoleum had opened automatically by 
God's will. But when they had been brought before the prefect's tribunal and 
failed to produce witnesses, they admitted the stratagem of the wrenching 
before any torture had been applied to them. The prefect had them suitably 
'wrenched' and condemned them to be paraded in public and to cry aloud 
the reason for their punishment. Thus had the Devil, inventor of evil, 
trained the soldiers
684



to lay blame not on their own sins, but on the orthodox faith that has been 
handed down by our fathers and on the monastic rule, the school of godly 
philosophy. Most of those who uttered such blasphemies were Christians 
only in semblance, but in truth were Paulicians who, unable to make 
manifest their own loathsome doctrines, seduced the ignorant by this device, 
extolling the Jewish minded Constantine as a prophet and a victor and 
embracing his impiety so as to subvert the incarnation of our Lord Jesus 
Christ.
  On 22 June, after the Christians and the Bulgarians had arrayed themselves 
not far from Adrianople, the Christians were grievously worsted in battle 
and the enemy won, so much so that most of the Christians had not even 
waited for the first clash before they took to headlong flight. Astonished, 
Kroummos thought that what was happening was some kind of ambush and 
for a while he restrained his men from pursuit. But when he had seen the 
Christians fleeing without restraint, he pursued them and killed a great 
multitude. He
also seized the camp train and despoiled it. As for the emperor, he	502 was 
making his homeward escape, cursing the army and its commanders and swearing 
he would abdicate the Empire. He communicated his intention to the patrician Leo, 
the strategos of the Anatolics, inasmuch as the latter was pious, extremely 
courageous, and fit in every respect to assume the kingship. But when Leo had 
refused, he left him in command of the themata and himself arrived in the Imperial 
City on 24 June, intent on abdicating his rule and appointing another, but prevented 
from so doing by his wife and his ministers. The most holy patriarch Nikephoros 
agreed to this course because if another were appointed under such circumstances, 
the emperor and his children would be spared. When the strategoi and the army had 
learnt that the emperor had fled to the City, they despaired of being ruled by him 
any longer and, having taken counsel among themselves, implored (the patrician) Leo, 
strategos of the Anatolics, to help the common cause and protect the Christian state. 
For a time the latter strenuously objected, bearing in mind the difficulty of the 
occasion and the enemy's irresistible attack and wishing to preserve his correct 
stance, untouched by treachery, towards the emperors. When, however, he had seen 
the enemy hastening against the City, he wrote to the patriarch Nikephoros an 
assurance of his own orthodoxy and asked for his prayers and consent with a view to 
assuming the power. On reaching the Tribunal outside the City with the strategoi 
and the army, he was proclaimed most legitimately emperor of the Romans. In the 
middle of the day he entered Constantinople through the Charsian gate and arrived in 
the palace. On being informed of his proclamation,
685
Michael, together with Prokopia and their children, sought refuge in the 
chapel of the Pharos, where they cut off their hair and donned monastic 
garb on 11 July of the 6th indiction, a Monday. The following day Leo 
was crowned by the patriarch Nikephoros in the ambo of the Great 
Church and ordered the City to be placed in a
503 state of defence. He himself toured the walls by day and night, 
encouraging everyone and bidding them be hopeful that God would 
soon work a miracle through the intercessions of the all pure Theotokos 
and all the saints and not allow us to be altogether shamed because of 
the multitude of our sins.
  Puffed up by his victory, Kroummos, the new Sennacherib, left his 
brother with his own force to besiege Adrianople and, six days after Leo's 
assumption of the imperial office, arrived at the Imperial City with might 
and horses and made a tour outside the walls, from Blachernai to the 
Golden Gate, exhibiting his forces. After performing his foul demonic 
sacrifices in the coastal meadow of the Golden Gate, he requested the 
emperor to affix his spear in the Golden Gate itself. When the latter had 
refused, he returned to his tent. Having admired the walls of the City and 
the emperor's well ordered array and giving up hope of the siege he had 
contemplated, he had recourse to negotiation and made some tentative 
proposals for peace. Grasping this opportunity, the emperor tried to 
ambush him, but was prevented from accomplishing this plan by the 
multitude of our sins inasmuch as the executants of the deed, through 
their incompetence, merely wounded Kroummos and did not inflict on 
him a fatal blow. Incensed at this, the wretch sent a raiding party to St 
Mamas and burnt the palace that is there. He loaded on carts the bronze 
lion of the hippodrome, the bear and the dragon of the fountain, as well as 
choice marbles and returned home after besieging and taking Adrianople. 
	·


686-688



